
Transcriber's note: Some typographical errors in the printed work have been
corrected: they are listed at the end of the text.

Text enclosed by underscores is in italics (_italics_).

       *       *       *       *       *




A

GRADUATED

ENGLISH-WELSH SPELLING-BOOK.

BY JOHN LEWIS.

LONDON:
LONGMAN, BROWN, GREEN, LONGMANS, & ROBERTS.
1857.




PREFACE.


The object of this work is to facilitate the progress of Welsh children in
the acquisition of the English language. Every one admits that it is of the
highest importance in the education of the young, that they should be well
grounded in Orthography. Thirty years' experience as a teacher having given
the author ample opportunity of noting the peculiar difficulties in the way
of Welsh children attaining a general knowledge of the English language, he
would beg leave to impress upon teachers the importance of making the
children under their care learn and spell every word in this little book,
together with the Welsh meanings. The task, though difficult at first, will
in the end reward both the teacher and the child; the former with the
pleasure of witnessing his pupil's progress, and the latter with a general
knowledge of both languages.

The book is divided into three parts: the first contains about 2013
monosyllables, arranged alphabetically, and classified according to the
number of letters. The second contains about 7497 words, arranged
alphabetically, and classified according to the number of syllables. The
third contains copious English-Welsh Dialogues.

To save the trouble of putting down twice such words as are used as nouns
and verbs, the author has placed the meaning of the noun in Welsh, and then
the verb with a colon between them. In dissyllables, the learner will
remember to place the accent on the first syllable when the word is used as
a noun, and on the latter syllable when used as a verb.

  THE AUTHOR

  Llanrhyddlad.




A GRADUATED

ENGLISH-WELSH SPELLING BOOK.




WORDS OF ONE AND TWO LETTERS.



A, _un_

Ah, _O!_ _och!_

Am, _ydwyf_, _wyf_

An, _un_

As, _megys_, _fel_

At, _yn_, _wrth_, _ger_

Be, _bod_, _hanfod_

By, _gan_; _wrth_

Do, _gwneuthur_, _gwneud_

Go, _myned_; _ewch_

Ha, _ha!_ _och!_

He, _efe_

I, _myfi_, _mi_

If, _os_, _pe_

In, _mewn_, _o fewn_

Is, _y mae_, _ydyw_; _sydd_, _oes_

It, _e_, _fe_, _fo_

Me, _mi_

My, _fy_, _eiddof_

No, _na_, _nid_, _nage_

Of, _o_, _gan_; _am_

Oh, _O!_ _och!_ _ho!_

On, _ar_; _ym mlaen_

Or, _neu_

Ox, _ych_

So, _felly_, _fel hyny_

To, _i_, _at_, _wrth_

Up, _i fyny_

Us, _ni_

We, _nyni_, _ni_

Ye, _chwi_, _chwychwi_




WORDS OF THREE LETTERS.



Act, _gweithred_: _gweithredu_

Add, _cyssylltu_, _dodi at_

Age, _oed_, _oedran_

Aid, _cymhorth_: _helpu_

Ail, _dolurio_, _poeni_

Aim, _amcan_: _amcanu_

Air, _awyr_; _awyro_

Ale, _cwrw_

All, _pawb_, _oll_

And, _a_, _ac_

Ant, _morgrugyn_

Apt, _chwannog_; _cymhwys_

Arc, _cromell_

Are, _ydym_, _ydynt_

Ark, _arch_

Arm, _braich_: _arfogi_

Art, _celfyddyd_: _wyt_

Ash, _onen_

Ask, _gofyn_

Ass, _asyn_

Awe, _arswyd_, _ofn_: _dychrynu_

Awl, _mynawyd_

Axe, _bwyell_

Bad, _drwg_

Bag, _cwd_, _cod_: _cydu_

Bar, _bar_, _bollt_: _bario_, _bolltio_

Bat, _ystlum_; _clwpa_

Bay, _morgilfach_; _gwineu_

Bed, _gwely_

Bee, _gwenynen_

Beg, _cardota_; _erfyn_

Bid, _erchi_; _cynnyg_

Big, _mawr_; _balch_

Bit, _dernyn_; _genfa_

Bog, _cors_

Bow, _bwa_; _ymgrymiad_

Box, _blwch_, _cist_

Boy, _bachgen_

Bud, _blaguryn_: _blaguro_

But, _ond_, _eithr_, _er hyny_

Buy, _prynu_

Can, _piser_: _gallu_

Car, _cerbyd_

Cat, _cath_

Cot, _bwthyn_

Cow, _buwch_

Cry, _wylo_, _crio_

Cud, _cil_

Cup, _cwpan_

Cut, _toriad_: _tori_

Dam, _arglawdd_; _argau_: _llynio_

Day, _diwrnod_, _dydd_

Den, _ffau_, _lloches_

Dew, _gwlith_

Did, _gwnaeth_, _gwnaed_

Die, _marw_, _trengi_

Dig, _cloddio_, _palu_

Dim, _tywyll_: _tywyllu_

Dip, _trochi_

Doe, _ewig_

Dog, _ci_

Dot, _man_; _nod_: _manu_; _nodi_

Dry, _sych_: _sychu_

Due, _dyled_; _dyledus_

Dug, _teth_: _paledig_

Dye, _lliw_: _lliwio_

Ear, _clust_; _twysen_

Ebb, _trai_: _treio_

Eat, _bwyta_

Eel, _llysẅen_

Egg, _wy_

End, _diwedd_; _terfyn_

Err, _cyfeiliorni_

Eve, _cyfnos_, _min nos_

Ewe, _mamog_

Eye, _llygad_: _llygadu_

Fan, _gwyntyll_: _gwyntyllio_

Far, _pell_

Fat, _tew_; _brasder_: _pesgi_

Fed, _pasgedig_

Fee, _gwobr_; _tâl_: _gwobrwyo_

Fen, _corsdir_, _morfa_

Few, _ychydig_

Fib, _celwydd_, _anwiredd_

Fig, _ffigysen_

Fin, _asgell_

Fir, _ffawydden_

Fit, _llewyg_; _addas_: _cyfaddasu_

Fix, _sicrhau_, _sefydlu_

Fly, _gwybedyn_: _ehedeg_

Foe, _gelyn_

Fog, _niwl_

For, _am_; _canys_; _oblegid_

Fox, _llwynog_

Fry, _manbysg_: _ffrio_

Fun, _digrifwch_

Fur, _ffwrw_, _panflew_

Gap, _bwlch_, _adwy_

Get, _cael_, _caffael_, _ceisio_

Gin, _gwirod_; _magl_

God, _Duw_

Got, _caffaeledig_

Gum, _glud_: _gludio_

Gun, _gwn_, _dryll_

Ham, _ffolen_, _y gar_

Hat, _het_, _capan_

Hay, _gwair_

Hem, _hem_: _hemio_

Hen, _iar_

Her, _hi_, _ei_

Hew, _cymmynu_, _naddu_

Hid, _cuddiedig_

Him, _ef_, _efe_

His, _ei_, _eiddo ef_

Hit, _tarawiad_; _ergyd_: _taro_

Hip, _pen y glun_, _clun_

Hob, _pentan_

Hod, _hawg_, _cafn cymmrwd_

Hoe, _caib_: _ceibio_

Hog, _mochyn_

Hop, _llam_: _llemain_

Hot, _poeth_, _brwd_

How, _pa_, _pa fodd_

Hut, _bwth_, _cwt_

Ice, _ia_

Ill, _drwg_, _claf_, _sal_

Inn, _gwestty_, _tafarn_

Jar, _costrel_: _gwrthdaro_

Jaw, _yr en_, _cern_

Jew, _Iuddew_

Job, _tasg_; _swydd_: _gorchwylio_

Joy, _llawenydd_, _gorfoledd_

Jug, _crothogen_, _diodlestr_

Key, _agoriad_, _allwedd_

Kid, _myn gafr_

Kin, _perthynas_

Lad, _hogyn_

Lap, _arffed_: _lleibio_

Law, _cyfraith_, _deddf_

Lay, _lleygol_: _gosod_, _dodi_

Led, _arweinedig_

Leg, _coes_; _llorp_

Let, _gosod_, _gadael_

Lid, _caead_

Lie, _celwydd_: _gorwedd_

Lip, _gwefus_, _min_

Lit, _goleuedig_

Log, _boncyff_; _cyfrifbill_

Lop, _ysgythru_

Lot, _coelbren_; _rhan_

Low, _isel_: _brefu_

Mad, _ynfyd_: _ynfydu_

Man, _dyn_, _gwr_

Map, _darlun_: _darlunio_

Mat, _mat_, _rhestog_

May, _Mai_: _gall_, _gallu_

Men, _dynion_

Met, _cyfarfodedig_

Mix, _cymmysgu_

Mob, _gwerinos_, _terfysglu_

Mow, _lladd_

Mud, _llaid_, _baw_: _lleidio_

Mug, _diodlestr_, _cwpan_

Nap, _hun_: _huno_

Nay, _nage_, _nac_; _nid felly_

Net, _rhwyd_

New, _newydd_

Nit, _nedden_

Nod, _awgrym_: _awgrymu_

Nor, _na_, _nac_, _nag_

Not, _na_, _nac_, _nad_, _ni_

Now, _yn awr_, _weithion_

Nun, _mynaches_

Nut, _cneuen_

Oak, _derwen_

Oar, _rhwyf_: _rhwyfo_

Odd, _od_, _hynod_; _anghydrif_

Ode, _awdl_

Off, _ymaith_, _oddi wrth_

Old, _hen_, _oedranus_

One, _un_, _rhyw un_

Orb, _pel_, _pellen_; _cylch_

Ore, _mŵn_, _mettel_

Our, _ein_

Out, _allan_, _o'r tu allan_

Owe, _dylu_; _bod mewn dyled_

Owl, _dylluan_

Own, _eiddo_; _hun_: _meddu_

Pan, _padell_

Paw, _pawen_: _palfu_

Pay, _tâl_, _cyflog_: _talu_

Pea, _pysen_

Peg, _hoel bren_: _pinio_

Pen, _pin_: _cau i fyny_

Pew, _eisteddle_

Pie, _pastai_

Pig, _mochyn_

Pin, _pin_, _nodwydd_: _pinio_

Pit, _pwll_, _pydew_: _pyllu_

Ply, _plyg_, _tuedd_: _ymroddi_

Pod, _coden_, _plisgyn_

Pot, _potyn_; _crochan_

Pox, _brech_

Put, _gosod_, _dodi_

Rag, _brat_, _cerpyn_

Ram, _hwrdd_: _hyrddio_

Ran, _rhedwyd_

Rap, _cnoc_: _cnocio_

Rat, _llygoden ffreinig_

Raw, _ir_, _ammrwd_

Ray, _pelydryn_: _pelydru_

Red, _coch_

Rib, _asen_

Rid, _troi heibio_: _rhyddhau_

Rim, _ymyl_, _cylch_

Rip, _rhwygo_

Rob, _ysbeilio_

Rod, _gwialen_

Roe, _iyrches_, _ewig_

Rot, _malldod_: _pydru_

Row, _rhes_: _rhwyfo_

Rub, _rhwbio_

Rue, _galaru_, _gofidio_

Rug, _cwrlid_, _huling_

Run, _rhedfa_: _rhedeg_

Rut, _ol olwyn_: _rhidio_

Rye, _rhyg_

Sad, _trist_, _prudd_

Sap, _nodd_, _sudd_: _tangloddio_

Sat, _eisteddedig_; _eisteddwyd_

Saw, _llif_: _llifio_; _gwelwyd_

Say, _dywedyd_

Sea, _môr_, _gweilgi_

See, _esgobaeth_: _gweled_

Set, _llawnrif_; _planigyn_: _gosod_, _planu_

Sew, _gwnïo_, _pwytho_

Sex, _rhyw_, _rhywogaeth_

She, _hi_

Shy, _gwylaidd_, _yswil_

Sin, _pechod_; _bai_: _pechu_

Sir, _syr_, _meistr_

Six, _chwech_

Sky, _gwybr_, _wybren_

Sly, _cyfrwys_

Sod, _tywarchen_

Son, _mab_

Sow, _hwch_

Sow, _hau_, _heu_

Spy, _ysbïwr_: _ysbïo_

Sty, _cwt mochyn_; _llefrithen_

Sue, _rhoi cwyn_; _rhoi cyfraith_

Sum, _swm_, _cyfanrif_: _cydgrynoi_

Sun, _haul_: _heulo_

Tax, _treth_: _trethu_

Tea, _te_

Ten, _deg_

The, _y_, _yr_

Thy, _dy_, _tau_

Tie, _cwlwm_: _cylymu_

Toe, _bys troed_

Ton, _tunell_

Too, _hefyd_, _dros ben_, _rhy_

Top, _top_, _pen uchaf_

Tow, _carth_: _llusgo_

Try, _profi_, _holi_; _ymgeisio_

Tub, _twb_, _twred_

Tug, _tyniad_: _llusgo_

Two, _dau_, _dwy_

Use, _arferiad_: _defnyddio_

Vex, _poeni_, _blino_

Vow, _adduned_: _addunedu_

War, _rhyfel_: _rhyfela_

Was, _oedd_, _ydoedd_

Wax, _cwyr_: _cwyro_

Way, _ffordd_, _llwybr_

Web, _gwe_

Wet, _gwlyb_: _gwlychu_

Who, _pwy_; _yr hwn_, _yr hon_

Why, _pa ham_, _am ba achos_

Win, _ennill_, _elwa_

Woe, _gwae_, _gofid_

Won, _ennilledig_

Yea, Yes, _ïe_, _do_, _felly mae_, _oes_

Yet, _eto_, _er hyny_

Yew, _ywen_, _pren yw_

You, _chwi_, _chwychwi_




WORDS OF FOUR LETTERS.



Ache, _dolur_: _poeni_

Alms, _elusenau_

Arch, _bwa_; _prif_: _bwäu_

Arms, _breichiau_; _arfau rhyfel_

Aunt, _modryb_

Babe, _maban_, _baban_

Back, _cefn_: _cefnogi_

Bait, _llith_: _abwydo_

Bake, _pobi_, _crasu_

Bald, _moel_

Bale, _swp_; _sypynu_

Ball, _pel_; _dawns_

Band, _rhwymyn_; _myntai_

Bang, _ergyd_: _taro_

Bank, _ariandy_; _bangc_

Bans, _gostegion_

Bard, _bardd_, _prydydd_

Bare, _noeth_, _llwm_; _unig_

Bark, _rhisgl_: _cyfarth_

Barm, _burym_

Barn, _ysgubor_

Base, _sylfaen_; _brwnt_; _gau_

Bask, _bronheulo_

Bath, _badd_, _ymolchfa_

Bawl, _gwaeddi_

Beak, _pig_, _gylfin_

Beam, _trawst_; _pelydryn_: _pelydru_

Bean, _ffäen_

Bear, _arth_: _dwyn_; _goddef_

Beat, _curo_, _baeddu_

Been, _wedi bod_

Beer, _diod_, _cwrw_

Bell, _cloch_

Belt, _gwregys_, _rhwymyn_

Bend, _plygu_

Bent, _plygedig_

Best, _goreu_, _yn oreu_

Bier, _elor_

Bill, _pig_; _hawleb_, _craifft_

Bind, _rhwymo_

Bird, _aderyn_

Bite, _cnoad_: _brathu_

Blew, _chwythwyd_

Blot, _dunod_; _anair_

Blow, _dyrnod_: _chwythu_

Blue, _glas_

Boar, _baedd_

Boat, _bad_, _cwch_

Boil, _penddüyn_: _berwi_

Bold, _hyf_, _eon_

Bolt, _bollt_, _bar_: _bolltio_

Bore, _twll_: _tyllu_

Born, _geni_, _genedig_

Both, _dau_, _dwy_

Bowl, _cawg_: _peldreiglo_

Bran, _rhuddion_

Bray, _rhuo fel asyn_

Bred, _eppiledig_

Brew, _darllaw_

Brim, _ymyl_, _min_

Brow, _ael_, _talcen_

Buck, _bwch_

Bulk, _swm_, _maint_

Bull, _tarw_

Buoy, _nofiadur_, _nofnod_

Burn, _llosg_: _llosgi_

Bush, _perth_

Bust, _penddelwedd_

Butt, _cornio_

Cage, _cawell_; _adardy_

Cake, _teisen_: _teisenu_

Calf, _llo_

Call, _galw_, _enwi_

Calm, _tawel_; _tegwch_: _tawelu_

Calx, _calch_

Came, _daeth_

Camp, _gwersyll_, _gwersyllfa_

Cane, _corsen_: _ffonio_

Cape, _penrhyn_

Card, _cerdyn_: _cribo gwlan_

Care, _gofal_: _gofalu_

Cart, _trol_, _men_

Case, _amwisg_; _cyflwr_: _amwisgo_

Cash, _arian_, _tâl_

Cast, _tafliad_: _lluchio_

Cave, _ogof_, _ceudwll_

Caul, _rhwyden_

Cell, _cell_

Cent, _cant_

Char, _hapwaith_: _golosgi_

Chew, _cnoi_

Chin, _gên_

Chip, _asglodyn_: _asglodi_

Cite, _dyfynu_

Clad, _gwisgedig_

Claw, _crafangc_, _palf_: _crafangu_

Clay, _clai_

Clip, _cneifio_, _brigdori_

Clod, _tywarchen_

Clog, _attal_, _rhwystr_

Club, _cnwpa_; _cyflesfa_, _clwb_

Coal, _gloyn_

Cock, _ceiliog_

Code, _llyfr_, _deddflyfr_

Coil, _cylchddyrwyn_

Coin, _arian bath_: _bathu_

Cold, _oer_, _anwyd_

Colt, _ebol_

Comb, _crib_: _cribo_

Come, _dyfod_, _dynesu_

Cool, _oer_: _oeri_

Cord, _rheffyn_; _tant_

Core, _bywedyn_; _crawn_

Corn, _ŷd_, _ydau_

Cost, _pris_; _traul_

Crib, _preseb_: _darnguddio_

Crop, _ffrwyth_: _blaendori_

Curb, _genfa_: _ffrwyno_

Dale, _dyffryn_, _glyn_

Dame, _meistres_

Damn, _melldithio_

Damp, _lleithder_: _lleithio_

Dare, _beiddio_

Dark, _tywyll_

Dart, _picell_: _picellu_

Dash, _diffyglin_: _taro_

Date, _dyddiad_: _dyddio_, _amseru_

Dawn, _gwawr_: _gwawrio_

Dead, _marw_

Deaf, _byddar_

Deal, _cyfran_: _cyfranu_

Dean, _deon_

Dear, _anwyl_; _drud_

Debt, _dyled_

Deck, _bwrdd llong_: _addurno_

Deed, _gweithred_

Deep, _dyfnder_; _dwfn_, _isel_

Deer, _carw_, _hydd_

Desk, _ysgrifenfwrdd_

Dike, _clawdd_, _ffos_

Dine, _ciniawa_

Dirt, _baw_, _llaid_

Dish, _dysgl_, _dysglaid_

Disk, _gwyneb_, _clawr_

Dive, _ymsuddo_

Dock, _llongborth_

Done, _gwneuthuredig_

Door, _drws_, _dor_

Dose, _dogn_

Dove, _colomen_

Down, _i lawr_; _manblu_

Drag, _car llusg_: _llusgo_

Draw, _tynu_; _llunio_

Dray, _car hir_

Drip, _dyferu_

Drop, _dyferyn_: _syrthio_

Drug, _cyffyr_; _gwaelbeth_

Drum, _tabwrdd_: _tabyrddu_

Duck, _hwyaden_: _trochi_

Duke, _duc_, _dug_

Dull, _dwl_; _hurt_: _hurtio_

Dumb, _mud_

Dung, _tail_: _teilo_

Dusk, _cyfnos_

Dust, _llwch_: _dylychio_

Each, _pob_, _pob un_

Earl, _iarll_

Earn, _ennill_, _elwa_

Ease, _gorphwysdra_: _esmwytho_

East, _dwyrain_

Edge, _min_, _awch_: _minio_

Else, _arall_, _os amgen_

Face, _gwyneb_: _gwynebu_

Fact, _ffaith_, _gwir_

Fade, _diflannu_, _gwywo_

Fail, _ffaelu_, _methu_

Fair, _ffair_; _prydferth_

Fall, _cwymp_: _syrthio_

False, _anwir_, _gau_

Fame, _enwogrwydd_; _clod_

Fang, _ysgythrddant_

Fare, _lluniaeth_

Farm, _tyddyn_: _ardrethu_

Fast, _ympryd_; _sicr_; _buan_: _ymprydio_

Fate, _tynged_; _anffawd_

Fawn, _carw ieuangc_: _llydnu_

Fear, _ofn_, _arswyd_: _ofni_

Feat, _gorchest_, _camp_

Feed, _porthiant_: _porthi_

Feel, _teimlo_

Feet, _traed_; _troedfeddau_

Fell, _tori_, _cwympo_

Felt, _llawban_: _teimlwyd_

Fern, _rhedyn_

File, _durlif_: _durlifo_

Fill, _llonaid_: _llenwi_

Film, _pilionen_, _croenen_

Find, _cael_; _chwilio_

Fine, _main_; _dirwy_: _dirwyo_

Fire, _tân_: _tanio_

Firm, _cadarn_; _cydfasnachwyr_

Fish, _pysgodyn_: _pysgotta_

Fist, _dwrn_

Five, _pump_

Flag, _baner_, _lluman_

Flat, _gwastad_, _llyfn_

Flaw, _agen_, _hollt_: _hollti_

Flax, _llin_

Flay, _blingo_

Flea, _chwanen_

Flee, _ffoi_, _cilio_

Flew, _ehedwyd_

Flog, _fflangellu_

Flow, _ffrwd_: _dylifo_

Flue, _ffunell_, _pibell simneu_

Flux, _llif_, _llifeiriad_

Foal, _ebol_, _llwdn_: _llydnu_

Foam, _ewyn_: _ewynu_

Fold, _corlan_: _plygu_

Folk, _pobl_

Fond, _hoff_

Font, _bedyddfaen_

Food, _ymborth_

Fool, _ynfyd_: _siomi_

Foot, _troed_; _troedfedd_

Ford, _rhyd_: _rhydio_

Fore, _blaen_, _blaenaf_

Fork, _fforch_; _pigfforch_

Form, _ffurf_, _dull_: _ffurfio_

Fort, _caer_, _castell_

Foul, _aflan_, _budr_; _brwnt_

Four, _pedwar_, _pedair_

Fowl, _aderyn_

Free, _rhydd_: _rhyddhau_

Fret, _anfoddloni_, _sori_

Frog, _llyffant_

From, _oddi_, _oddi wrth_

Full, _llawn_: _panu_

Fund, _trysorfa_

Furl, _crychio_, _plygu_

Fuse, _toddi_

Gain, _elw_, _budd_

Gale, _awel_, _chwa_

Gall, _bustl_: _dolurio_

Game, _helwriaeth_: _cellwair_

Gang, _myntai_, _torf_

Gaol, _carchar_

Gape, _ystwyro_; _dylyfu gên_

Gash, _archoll_: _archolli_

Gasp, _dyheu_, _tynu anadl_

Gate, _llidiart_, _porth_

Gave, _rhoddwyd_

Gaze, _sylliad_: _syllu_

Geld, _dysbaddu_, _cyweirio_

Gift, _rhodd_, _dawn_; _gwobr_

Gild, _euro_, _goreuro_

Gill, _tagell_

Gilt, _goreuredig_

Gird, _amwregysu_

Girl, _geneth_

Girt, _cengl_

Give, _rhoddi_; _ymroddi_

Glad, _llawen_, _siriol_

Glue, _glud_: _gludio_

Gnat, _ednogyn_

Gnaw, _cnoi_

Goad, _swmbwl_: _swmbylu_

Goat, _gafr_

Gold, _aur_

Gone, _wedi myned_

Good, _da_; _daionus_

Gore, _gôr_: _gori_; _cornio_

Gout, _troedwst_

Gown, _gŵn_, _hug_

Gray, Grey, _llwyd_

Grin, _esgyrnygiad_: _esgyrnygu_

Grit, _grut_, _grutfaen_

Grow, _tyfu_, _prifio_

Grub, _corbryf_: _diwreiddio_

Gulf, _morgaingc_

Gull, _gwylan_: _twyllo_

Gums, _uchanedd_, _cig y dannedd_

Gush, _llifeiriad_: _llifeirio_

Guts, _perfedd_

Haft, _carn_, _dwrn_: _carnio_

Hail, _cenllysg_; _Henffych well_

Hair, _gwallt_

Half, _hanner_

Hall, _llys_; _neuadd_; _dadleudy_

Halt, _cloffni_: _cloffi_; _sefyll_

Hand, _llaw_: _trosglwyddo_; _traddodi_

Hang, _crogi_

Hank, _cengl_

Hard, _caled_

Hare, _ysgyfarnog_

Hark, _clyw_, _gwrando_

Harm, _niweid_: _niweidio_

Harp, _telyn_: _telynorio_

Hart, _carw_, _hydd_

Hash, _briwgig_: _briwio_

Hate, _casineb_: _casäu_

Have, _cael_, _caffael_; _meddu_

Haze, _niwl_, _tarth_

Haul, _tynu_, _llusgo_

Hawk, _hebog_, _gwalch_

Head, _pen_: _blaenori_

Heal, _iachau_

Heap, _crug_, _twr_: _pentyru_

Hear, _clywed_

Heat, _gwres_: _poethi_

Heed, _ystyriaeth_: _ystyried_

Heel, _sawdl_: _sodli_

Heir, _etifedd_

Held, _daliwyd_

Hell, _uffern_

Helm, _llyw_

Help, _cynnorthwy_: _cynnorthwyo_

Hemp, _cywarch_

Herb, _llysieuyn_

Herd, _gyr_, _myntai_: _deadellu_

Here, _yma_, _yn y lle hwn_

Hide, _croen_: _cuddio_

High, _uchel_

Hill, _bryn_

Hilt, _dwrn_ (_carn_) _cleddyf_

Hint, _amnaid_: _amneidio_

Hire, _cyflog_: _cyflogi_

Hive, _cwch_: _cychu_

Hoar, _llwyd_

Hold, _dalfa_; _cellfa_: _gafael_

Hole, _twll_

Home, _cartref_

Hoof, _carn_

Hook, _bach_: _bachu_

Hoop, _cylch_: _cylchu_

Hope, _gobaith_: _gobeithio_

Hops, _hopys_

Horn, _corn_

Hose, _hosan_

Host, _llu_, _byddin_; _gwesttywr_

Hour, _awr_

Howl, _udfa_: _udo_

Huge, _dirfawr_

Hulk, _corff llong_

Hull, _corff llong_: _plisgyn_

Hunt, _helyddiaeth_: _hela_

Hurt, _niweid_: _niwedio_; _dolurio_

Hush, _taw_, _dystewi_

Husk, _cibyn_, _plisgyn_

Hymn, _emyn_

Inch, _modfedd_

Itch, _y crafu_: _ysu_

Jail, _carchar_

Jamb, _ystlysbost_, _gorsin_

Jest, _gwatwar_, _cellwair_

Join, _cydio_: _cyssylltu_

Joke, _cellwair_

Jump, _naid_: _neidio_

June, _Mehefin_

Just, _iawn_, _cyfiawn_

Keen, _craff_, _llym_

Keep, _dal_, _cadw_

Kick, _troediad_: _troedio_, _cic_

Kill, _lladd_, _llofruddio_

Kind, _rhywogaeth_; _caredig_

Kine, _buchod_, _gwartheg_

King, _brenin_

Kiss, _cusan_: _cusanu_

Kite, _barcut_

Knee, _glin_, _pen y glin_

Knew, _adwaenai_; _gwyddai_

Knit, _gwau_

Knob, _cnap_

Knot, _cwlwm_

Know, _gwybod_

Lace, _ysnoden_: _ysnodenu_

Lade, _llwytho_

Lair, _gorweddle_

Lake, _llyn_; _lliw coch_

Lamb, _oen_: _bwrw oen_

Lame, _cloff_: _cloffi_

Lamp, _llusern_

Land, _tir_: _tirio_, _glanio_

Lane, _heolan_

Lard, _bloneg_

Lark, _ehedydd_

Lash, _carai_: _ffrewyllu_; _rhwymo_

Lass, _llangces_

Last, _pren troed_; _olaf_

Late, _hwyr_, _diweddar_

Lath, _eisen_: _eisio_

Lead, _plwm_

Lead, _arwain_; _blaenori_

Leaf, _deilen_, _dalen_

Leak, _agen_, _hollt_: _arlloesi_

Lean, _teneu_: _pwyso ar_

Leap, _naid_: _neidio_

Lees, _gwaddod_

Left, _aswy_: _gadawedig_

Lend, _rhoi benthyg_

Lens, _crymwydr_

Lent, _y garawys_: _echwynedig_

Less, _llai_

Lest, _rhag_, _fel na_

Lice, _llau_

Lick, _llyfiad_: _llyfu_

Lieu, _lle_

Life, _bywyd_, _oes_

Lift, _codiad_: _codi_, _dyrchafu_

Like, _tebyg_, _fel_: _hoffi_

Limb, _aelod_: _diaelodi_

Lime, _calch_: _calchu_

Line, _llinyn_; _llinell_: _llinellu_

Lisp, _bloesgi_

Live, _byw_, _bywiog_: _bucheddu_

List, _cofres_, _rhestr_: _chwennychu_

Load, _llwyth_: _llwytho_

Loaf, _torth_

Loan, _benthyg_

Lock, _clo_: _cloi_

Loin, _llwyn_, _arenau_

Long, _hir_, _maith_

Lone, _unig_

Look, _edrychiad_: _edrych_

Loom, _gwëydd_

Loop, _dolen_: _dolfachu_

Lord, _arglwydd_

Lose, _colli_, _cael colled_

Loss, _colled_

Lost, _coll_, _colledig_

Loud, _uchel_, _croch_

Love, _cariad_: _caru_

Luck, _hap_, _llwydd_

Lump, _clamp_, _telpyn_

Lust, _trachwant_: _chwantu_

Made, _gwneuthuredig_

Maid, _morwyn_, _gwyryf_

Mail, _llythyrgod_

Maim, _anaf_: _anafu_

Main, _penaf_, _prif_

Make, _gwneuthuriad_: _gwneud_

Male, _gwryw_

Malt, _brag_: _bragu_

Mane, _mwng_

Mare, _caseg_

Mark, _nod_: _nodi_

Mart, _maelfa_

Mash, _cymmysg_: _cymmysgu_

Mask, _mwgwd_: _mygydu_

Mass, _twr_; _corff y bobl_; _yr offeren_

Mast, _hwylbren_

Mate, _cydymaith_; _islywydd_: _cymharu_

Mead, _medd_; _dôl_

Meal, _blawd_; _pryd o fwyd_

Mean, _cyfrwng_; _modd_; _gwael_: _meddwl_, _tybio_

Meat, _ymborth_, _cigfwyd_

Meek, _addfwyn_, _llariaidd_

Meet, _addas_: _cyfarfod_

Melt, _toddi_, _dadmer_

Mend, _gwellau_

Mess, _saig o fwyd_, _arlwy_

Mete, _mesur_

Mice, _llygod_

Mild, _tirion_, _tyner_

Mile, _milldir_

Milk, _llaeth_: _godro_

Mill, _melin_: _malu_

Mind, _meddwl_: _meddylio_

Mine, _fy_, _eiddof_; _mwnglawdd_

Mint, _bathdy_: _bathu_

Mire, _llaid_: _ymdrybaeddu_

Miss, _meistresan_: _ffaelu_

Mist, _niwl_, _tarth_

Mite, _hatling_, _mymryn_

Moan, _cwyn_: _cwyno_

Moat, _amglawdd_, _ffos_

Mock, _gwawd_: _gwawdio_

Mole, _gwadd_, _twrch daiar_

Monk, _mynach_

Mood, _modd_, _tuedd_

Moon, _lleuad_, _lloer_

Moor, _dyn du_; _morfa_; _angorfa_

More, _mwy_, _rhagor_

Morn, _boreu_, _bore_

Moss, _mwswgl_

Most, _mwyaf_, _amlaf_

Mote, _brycheüyn_

Moth, _gwyfyn_

Move, _symmud_

Much, _llawer_

Muck, _tail_: _teilo_

Mule, _mul_

Must, _rhaid yw_

Mute, _mud_

Nail, _ewin_; _hoel_: _hoelio_

Name, _enw_: _enwi_

Nape, _gwar_, _gwegil_

Neap, _isel_, _treiawl_

Near, _agos_, _gerllaw_

Neat, _tlws_, _hardd_

Neck, _gwddf_

Need, _angen_, _rhaid_: _eisiau_

Nest, _nyth_: _nythu_

News, _newyddion_

Next, _nesaf_

Nice, _moethus_; _manwl_

Nigh, _agos_, _cyfagos_

Nine, _naw_

None, _dim_; _neb_

Noon, _canoldydd_

Nose, _trwyn_

Note, _nodyn_: _nodi_

Noun, _enw_, _sylweddair_

Numb, _fferllyd_: _fferu_

Oath, _llw_, _twng_

Oats, _ceirch_

Odds, _rhagoriaeth_, _mantais_

Once, _unwaith_

Ooze, _nawsiad_: _nawsio_

Pace, _cam_: _arafgerdded_

Pack, _swp_: _sypynio_

Page, _tudalen_; _gwas_

Paid, _talwyd_; _taledig_

Pail, _crwc_, _cunnog_

Pain, _poen_; _llafur_: _poeni_

Pair, _par_, _cymhariaid_: _cymharu_

Pale, _gwelw_, _glaswyn_

Pall, _brethyn elor_

Palm, _palf_; _cledr y llaw_: _palfu_

Pane, _pedroryn_

Pang, _gloes_, _gwasgfa_

Pare, _didoni_, _pilio_

Part, _rhan_: _rhanu_

Pass, _bwlch_; _taithdrwydded_: _pasio_

Past, _wedi myned heibio_; _wedi_

Path, _llwybr_

Pave, _palmantu_

Pawn, _gwystl_: _gwystlo_

Pear, _gelleigen_, _rhwnen_

Peat, _mawn_

Peck, _pec_: _pigo_

Peel, _crafell_, _pil_: _pilio_

Peep, _cipolwg_: _cipedrych_

Peer, _pendefig_

Pelt, _lluchio_, _baeddu_

Pick, _pig_: _pigo_, _dewis_

Pike, _gwaewffon_

Pile, _pentwr_: _pentyru_

Pill, _pelen_

Pine, _pinwydden_: _dihoeni_

Pint, _peint_

Pipe, _pib_, _pibell_

Pith, _mwydyn_

Plan, _cynllun_: _cynllunio_

Play, _chware_: _chwareua_, _chware_

Plea, _esgus_: _dadleu_

Plot, _cydfwriad_: _cydfwriadu_

Plum, _eirynen_

Pole, _pegwn_, _pawl_

Poll, _cofres etholwyr_: _tocio_

Pomp, _rhwysg_

Pond, _llyn_, _merllyn_

Pool, _llyn_

Poor, _tylawd_; _gwael_

Pope, _Pab_

Pore, _chwysdwll_: _syllu_

Port, _porthladd_

Post, _post_; _swydd_; _llythyrfa_: _sefydlu_

Pour, _tywallt_

Pray, _gweddio_, _atolygu_

Prey, _ysglyfaeth_: _ysglyfio_

Prop, _atteg_: _attegu_

Pull, _tyn_: _tynu_

Pulp, _bywyn_, _mwydionyn_

Pump, _sugnedydd_: _sugngodi_

Pure, _pur_; _glân_; _gwir_

Push, _gwth_: _gwthio_

Quay, _llongborth_

Quit, _rhydd_; _gadael_

Race, _gyrfa_, _rhedfa_

Raft, _clwydfad_, _cluder_

Rage, _cynddaredd_: _ffyrnigo_

Rail, _canllaw_; _cledren_: _difrio_

Rain, _gwlaw_: _gwlawio_

Rake, _cribyn_: _cribynio_

Rank, _rhes_; _drewllyd_: _rhestru_

Rape, _trais_; _meipen yd_: _treisio_

Rare, _prin_; _anfynych_

Rash, _crugdarddiad_; _byrbwyll_

Rasp, _rhathell_: _rhathellu_

Rate, _pris_; _treth_: _trethu_

Read, _darllen_

Ream, _ugain drefa_, _rhef_

Reap, _medel_: _medi_

Rear, _bon_, _ol_: _codi_, _dyrchafu_

Reed, _corsen_

Reef, _hwylblyg_: _hwylblygu_

Rein, _awen_: _ffrwyno_

Rend, _rhwyg_: _rhwygo_

Rent, _ardreth_; _rhwygiad_: _ardrethu_

Rest, _gorphwysfa_; _ereill_: _gorphwyso_

Rich, _cyfoethog_, _goludog_

Rick, _das_: _dasu_

Ride, _marchogaeth_

Ring, _modrwy_: _seinio_

Ripe, _addfed_: _addfedu_

Rise, _codiad_: _codi_

Risk, _perygl_; _antur_: _peryglu_

Rite, _defod_, _arfer_

Road, _ffordd_

Roam, _crwydro_

Roan, _brych_

Roar, _rhuad_: _rhuo_

Robe, _gwisg_: _gwisgo_

Rock, _craig_: _siglo_

Roll, _rhol_; _plyglyfr_: _rholio_

Rood, _rhwd_, _pedwaran erw_

Roof, _nen_, _to_: _toi_

Rook, _ydfran_

Room, _ystafell_, _lle_

Root, _gwreiddyn_: _gwreiddio_

Rope, _rhaff_

Rose, _rhosyn_

Rote, _cylchred_: _dysgu allan_

Rout, _ymlid_; _terfysgu_

Rude, _difoes_

Rule, _rheol_: _llinellu_

Rump, _cloren_, _cynffon_

Rush, _brwynen_; _rhuthr_: _rhuthro_

Rust, _rhwd_: _rhydu_

Sack, _sach_: _sachu_

Safe, _cellgrog_; _diogel_

Sail, _hwyl_: _hwylio_

Sake, _achos_, _mwyn_

Sale, _gwerth_, _arwerth_

Salt, _halen_: _halltu_

Same, _un_, _yr un_

Sand, _tywod_

Save, _eithr_, _ond_: _cadw_, _gwared_

Scab, _crachen_, _cramen_

Scar, _craith_: _creithio_

Scum, _ewyn_: _diewynu_

Seal, _morlo_; _sel_: _selio_

Seam, _gwrym_, _gwnïad_

Sear, _serio_

Seat, _eisteddfa_; _gosodiad_

Seed, _had_: _hadu_

Seek, _ceisio_

Seen, _gweledig_

Self, _hun_, _hunan_

Sell, _gwerthu_

Send, _anfon_, _danfon_

Shed, _lluest_: _tywallt_

Shin, _crimog_

Ship, _llong_: _llongi_

Shod, _pedoledig_

Shoe, _esgid_; _pedol_: _pedoli_

Shot, _ergyd_: _saethedig_

Shop, _maelfa_

Show, _golygiad_: _dangos_

Shun, _gochelyd_

Shut, _cauad_: _cau_

Sick, _claf_, _sal_: _clefychu_

Side, _ochr_: _ochri_

Sift, _gogrynu_

Sigh, _ochenaid_: _ocheneidio_

Sign, _arwydd_: _arwyddo_

Silk, _sidan_

Sill, _trothwy_, _rhiniog_

Sing, _canu_

Sink, _ceuffos_: _suddo_

Sire, _tad_, _tadwys_

Site, _sefyllfa_, _safle_

Size, _maint_; _glud_

Skim, _dihufenu_

Skin, _croen_: _blingo_

Skip, _llam_: _llemain_

Slab, _llech_

Slay, _lladd_

Slew, _lladdwyd_

Slip, _llithred_: _llithro_

Slit, _hollt_: _hollti_

Slow, _araf_, _annyben_

Slug, _malwen_; _pelenig hirgron_

Slur, _gwarthnod_, _llithren_

Slut, _budrog_

Snow, _eira_: _bwrw eira_, _odi_

Snug, _cryno_, _clyd_

Soak, _mwydo_

Soap, _sebon_: _seboni_

Soar, _uch-hedeg_

Soft, _meddal_; _tyner_

Soil, _pridd_, _tir_: _diwyno_

Sold, _gwerthedig_

Sole, _unig_; _gwadn_: _gwadnu_

Some, _rhai_; _rhyw_; _peth_

Song, _cân_

Soon, _yn fuan_

Soot, _huddygl_

Sore, _dolur_; _dolurus_

Sort, _math_: _trefnu_

Soul, _enaid_

Sour, _sur_: _suro_

Span, _rhychwant_

Spar, _bollt_; _gwydrfaen_

Spew, _cyfogi_

Spin, _nyddu_

Spit, _bêr_: _poeri_

Spot, _ysmot_: _ysmotio_

Spun, _nyddedig_

Spur, _yspardun_: _ysparduno_

Stab, _brath_, _gwân_: _gwanu_

Stag, _carw_

Star, _seren_

Stay, _arosiad_: _aros_

Stem, _paladr_, _corsen_: _gwrthnofio_

Step, _cam_; _ffon ysgol_: _camu_

Stew, _arferwi_

Stir, _ystwr_; _cyffroi_; _symmud_

Stop, _arosiad_; _rhwystro_; _cau_

Stow, _trefnu_

Such, _cyfryw_, _y fath_

Suck, _sugn_; _sugno_

Suds, _sebondrwyth_

Suit, _par_; _cwyn_: _cyfatebu_

Sure, _sicr_, _gwir_

Surf, _môrchwydd_, _ymchwydd_

Swan, _alarch_

Sway, _awdurdod_; _rhwysg_: _rhwysgo_

Swim, _nofio_

Tack, _corhoelen_: _brasbwytho_

Tail, _cynffon_, _cloren_

Take, _cymmeryd_, _derbyn_

Tale, _chwedl_, _ystori_

Talk, _siarad_

Tall, _tal_, _hir_, _uchel_

Tame, _dof_: _dofi_

Tank, _dyfrgist_

Tape, _llinynwe_

Tare, _cynhwysgoll_; _chwyn_

Task, _gorchwyl_, _tasg_: _tasgu_

Team, _gwedd_

Tear, _deigryn_

Tear, _rhwygo_

Tell, _dywedyd_

Tend, _tueddu_; _gweini_

Test, _prawf_, _holiad_

Tent, _pabell_: _pabellu_

Term, _ymadrodd_; _ammod_; _tymor_

Text, _testyn_, _adran_

Than, _na_, _nag_

That, _hwnw_, _hono_, _hyny_; _y neb_; _y sawl_; _yr hyn_; _mai_, _mal_,
_fel_

Thaw, _dadmar_, _meiriol_: _meirioli_

Thee, _ti_, _tydi_, _di_, _dydi_

Them, _hwy_, _hwynt_

Then, _y pryd hyny_; _yna_

They, _hwy_, _hwynt-hwy_

Thin, _teneu_, _main_

This, _hwn_, _hon_, _hyn_

Thou, _ti_, _tydi_

Thus, _fel hyn_

Tide, _llanw_: _ffrydlifo_

Tile, _peithynen_

Till, _cloergell_; _hyd_, _hyd oni_: _llafurio_

Told, _dywededig_

Toll, _toll_, _treth_: _tolli_

Tone, _tôn_

Tomb, _bedd_, _beddrod_

Took, _cymmerwyd_

Tool, _erfyn_, _offeryn_

Torn, _rhwygiedig_

Toss, _talf_: _taflu_, _lluchio_

Tour, _cylchdaith_, _taith_

Town, _tref_

Trap, _carfagl_: _maglu_

Tree, _pren_, _coeden_

Tret, _traul_

Trip, _llithrad_: _llithro_

Trot, _tuth_: _tuthio_

True, _gwir_, _cywir_

Tube, _pibell_: _pibellu_

Tuft, _tusw_

Tune, _tôn_: _perseinio_

Turf, _mawn_

Turn, _trofa_, _dymchwelyd_: _troi_

Type, _cysgod_; _argraph lythyren_

Vail, Veil, _gorchudd_: _gorchuddio_

Vain, _ofer_, _gwag_

Vale, _dyffryn_, _cwm_

Vase, _addurngawg_

Vane, _ceiliog gwynt_

Vast, _dirfawr_

Veal, _cig llo_

Veer, _troi_, _cylchdroi_: _trawshwylio_

Vein, _gwythïen_

Vent, _agorfa_: _agor_

Verb, _berf_, _perwyddiad_

Vest, _bronwisg_: _breinio_

Vice, _drygioni_; _gafaelwr_

View, _golwg_: _golygu_

Vile, _gwael_, _salw_

Vine, _gwinwydden_

Void, _gwag_; _dirym_

Vote, _pleidlais_: _pleidleisio_

Urge, _annog_, _cymmell_

Wade, _rhydio_

Waft, _chwyfiad_: _chwyfanu_

Wait, _aros_, _dysgwyl_

Wake, _gwylnos_: _gwylio_

Walk, _rhodfa_: _cerdded_

Wall, _gwal_, _mur_: _murio_

Want, _angen_, _eisiau_

Ward, _cadwraeth_, _carchar_: _gwarchod_

Ware, _nwyddau_: _gochel_

Warm, _cynhes_: _twymo_

Warn, _rhybuddio_

Warp, _ystof_, _dylif_: _dylifo_

Wart, _dafaden_

Wash, _golchion_: _golchi_

Wasp, _cacynen_

Wave, _ton_: _chwyfio_

Weak, _gwan_, _llesg_

Wean, _diddyfnu_

Wear, _traul_: _gwisgo_

Weed, _chwyn_: _chwynu_

Week, _wythnos_

Weep, _wylo_, _galaru_

Well, _ffynnon_; _iach_; _yn dda_

Went, _aeth_

Wept, _wyledig_

West, _gorllewin_

What, _yr hyn_, _pa beth_

When, _pa_, _pan_, _pa bryd_

Whet, _hogiad_: _hogi_

Whey, _maidd_

Whip, _chwip_, _ffrewyll_: _ffrewyllu_

Whom, _pwy_; _yr hwn_, _yr hon_

Wide, _llydan_, _eang_

Wife, _gwraig_

Wild, _anial_; _gwyllt_

Will, _ewyllys_: _ewyllysio_

Wind, _gwynt_

Wind, _dirwyn_

Wine, _gwin_

Wing, _aden_, _asgell_: _asgellu_

Wink, _amneidio_

Wipe, _sychu_

Wise, _doeth_; _modd_, _dull_

Wish, _deisyfiad_: _deisyf_

With, _a_, _ag_, _gyda_

Wolf, _blaidd_

Womb, _croth_, _bru_

Wood, _coed_, _llwyn_

Wool, _gwlan_

Word, _gair_: _geirio_

Work, _gwaith_: _gweithio_

Worm, _pryf_, _llyngyren_; _troellffon_

Worn, _treuliedig_

Wort, _breci_

Wrap, _plygu_

Wren, _dryw_

Writ, _gwyslythyr_

Yard, _llathen_; _buarth_

Yarn, _edef_

Year, _blwyddyn_

Yolk, _melyn wy_

Your, _eich_

Zeal, _sel_, _aidd_, _eiddigedd_

Zone, _gwregys_, _cylch_




WORDS OF FIVE LETTERS.



Batch, _pobiad_

Bathe, _ymdrochi_

Beach, _traeth_, _tywyn_

Beads, _gleiniau_

Beard, _barf_

Beast, _anifail_

Beech, _ffawydden_

Bench, _maingc_

Birth, _genedigaeth_

Birch, _bedw_

Bitch, _gast_

Black, _du_, _tywyll_

Blade, _llafn_; _eginyn_

Blain, _penddüyn_

Blame, _bai_: _beio_

Blank, _gwagle_

Blast, _chwa_

Blaze, _fflam_: _fflamio_

Bleak, _oer_, _oerllyd_

Bleat, _brefiad_: _brefu_

Bleed, _gwaedu_

Bless, _bendithio_

Blind, _dall_; _tywyll_; _gorchudd_

Bliss, _gwynfyd_

Block, _cyff_, _boncyff_

Blood, _gwaed_

Bloom, _blodau_

Blunt, _pwl_: _pylu_

Blush, _gwrid_: _gwrido_

Board, _astell_, _plangc_: _byrddio_

Boast, _ymffrost_

Bolts, _gefynau_

Borne, _cynnaledig_

Bough, _caingc_

Bound, _terfyn_; _rhwymedig_

Brace, _rhwymyn_; _cwpl_: _cydio_

Brain, _ymenydd_

Brand, _haiarnnod_, _llosnod_

Brass, _pres_

Bread, _bara_

Brave, _dewr_, _glew_

Break, _tori_, _dryllio_

Breed, _rhyw_, _hil_: _eppilio_

Bribe, _llygrwobr_: _hudobri_

Brick, _priddfaen_

Bride, _priodferch_

Brief, _crynoad_, _byr_

Brine, _heli_

Bring, _dwyn_, _cyrchu_

Brink, _ochr_, _min_

Brisk, _bywiog_

Broad, _llydan_

Broil, _rhostio_, _briwlio_

Brood, _nythaid_

Brook, _nant_: _goddef_

Broom, _banadl_

Broth, _potes_

Brown, _llwyd_, _gwrm_

Brush, _gwrychell_: _ysgubo_

Brute, _anifail_, _milyn_

Build, _adeiladu_

Burnt, _llosgedig_

Burst, _ymdoriad_: _ymdori_

Calve, _bwrw llo_, _llydnu_

Carve, _cerfio_, _bwyttori_

Catch, _dal_, _gafaelu_

Cause, _achos_: _achosi_

Cease, _peidio_

Chaff, _us_, _manus_

Chain, _cadwyn_: _cadwyno_

Chair, _cadair_

Charm, _swyn_: _swyno_, _boddio_

Chart, _darlunlen_

Chase, _helwriaeth_: _hela_

Cheap, _rhad_, _isel_

Cheat, _twyll_: _twyllo_

Check, _rhwystr_: _attal_; _ceryddu_

Cheek, _grudd_, _boch_

Cheer, _llonder_: _lloni_

Chest, _cist_

Chide, _senu_, _ceryddu_

Chief, _penaf_, _prif_

Child, _plentyn_

Chill, _fferdod_: _fferu_

Chine, _glain cefn_, _cefnddryll_

Chirp, _trydar_

Choir, _côr_

Choke, _tagu_

Chord, _tant_, _cord_

Chyle, _caul_

Chyme, _tewsudd_, _maethsudd_

Churn, _buddai_: _corddi_

Claim, _hawl_: _hawlio_

Clash, _gwrthdaro_

Class, _dosparth_: _trefnu_

Clean, _glân_: _glanhau_

Clear, _gloyw_; _amlwg_: _glanhau_

Cleft, _holltedig_

Clerk, _ysgrifenydd_, _clochydd_

Cliff, _clogwyn_

Climb, _dringo_

Cling, _glynu wrth_

Cloak, _mantell_: _mantellu_

Clock, _awrlais_, _cloc_

Close, _cae_; _cyfagos_

Cloth, _brethyn_

Cloud, _cwmmwl_: _cymmylu_

Clown, _drelyn_

Coach, _cerbyd_

Coast, _arfordir_, _glan_

Corps, _byddinran_

Couch, _gorweddfaingc_: _gorwedd_

Cough, _peswch_: _pesychu_

Count, _iarll_: _rhifo_

Court, _llys_: _caru_

Cramp, _cwlwm gwythi_: _caethiwo_

Crank, _crangc_: _offeryn bachog_

Crate, _crawell_

Crawl, _ymlusgo_

Cream, _hufen_

Creed, _credo_

Creek, _cilfach_

Creep, _ymlusgo_

Crest, _crib_, _copa_

Crime, _bai_, _trosedd_

Croak, _crygleisio_

Cross, _croes_: _croesi_

Croft, _erw_

Crowd, _torf_, _tyrfa_

Crown, _coron_: _coroni_

Crush, _gwasgiad_: _ysigo_, _malurio_

Crust, _crawen_

Curse, _melldith_: _melldithio_

Curve, _crwca_: _camu_

Dance, _dawns_: _crychneidio_

Daunt, _digaloni_, _llwfrhau_

Death, _angau_

Dense, _tew_, _dwysedig_

Depth, _dyfnder_

Ditch, _ffos_; _clawdd_

Doubt, _ammeu_

Dough, _toes_

Downs, _noethdir_

Draft, _cynllun_; _hawlysgrif_

Drain, _dyfrffos_: _sychu_

Drake, _ceiliog hwyad_

Drawl, _geirlusg_: _geirlusgo_

Drawn, _tynedig_, _wedi ei dynu_

Dread, _ofn_, _arswyd_: _ofni_

Dream, _breuddwyd_: _breuddwydio_

Dress, _gwisg_: _gwisgo_

Drift, _tuedd_: _gyru_

Drill, _trul_, _trwydden_: _treulio_

Drink, _diod_: _yfed_

Drive, _gyru_

Drone, _begegyr_: _diogi_

Dross, _sothach_

Drove, _gyr_, _deadell_

Drown, _boddi_

Drunk, _meddw_

Dunce, _penbwl_

Dwarf, _corach_: _cori_

Dwell, _anneddu_

Earth, _daiar_, _tir_

Eaves, _bargod_; _bondo_

Eight, _wyth_

Faint, _aneglur_: _llewygu_

Faith, _ffydd_

False, _anwir_, _gau_

Fault, _bai_, _trosedd_

Feast, _gwledd_; _gwyl_: _gwledda_

Feign, _ymrithio_

Fence, _gwrych_: _caeru_

Fetch, _cyrchu_

Field, _cae_, _maes_

Fight, _ymladdfa_: _ymladd_

Filth, _budredd_

First, _cyn_, _cyntaf_

Flail, _ffust_

Flame, _fflam_, _ffagl_: _fflamio_

Flank, _tenewyn_; _adeinlu_

Flash, _fflamiad_: _melltenu_

Flesh, _cig_, _cigfwyd_

Fleet, _llynges_; _cyflym_: _cyflymu_

Fling, _tafl_: _taflu_

Flint, _callestr_

Float, _cludr_: _nofio_

Flock, _deadell_: _ymdyru_

Flood, _llif_: _llifo_

Floor, _llawr_: _llorio_

Flour, _peillied_, _blawd_: _blodio_

Force, _grym_, _gallu_: _dirgymhell_

Forge, _ffwrnweithdy_: _morthwylio_

Forth, _allan_, _rhag llaw_

Found, _caffaeledig_: _seilio_, _sylfaenu_

Frail, _brau_, _gwan_

Frame, _ffurf_: _ffurfio_

Fraud, _twyll_

Fresh, _newydd_; _croyw_

Frith, _cyfyngfor_

Front, _gwyneb_, _tu blaen_: _gwynebu_

Frost, _rhew_

Froth, _ewyn_

Frown, _cuch_, _gwg_: _cuchio_

Fruit, _ffrwyth_

Furze, _eithin_

Gauge, _mesurai_: _mesuro_

Geese, _gwyddau_

Ghost, _ysbryd_

Gifts, _doniau_, _rhoddion_

Glass, _gwydr_, _drych_

Glaze, _gwydro_

Glean, _lloffa_

Glide, _ymlithro_

Globe, _pellen_, _clob_

Gloom, _tywyllni_

Gloss, _agoriad_; _dysgleirdeb_: _egluro_

Glove, _maneg_

Goods, _da_, _daoedd_, _dodrefn_

Goose, _gwydd_

Gorse, _eithin_

Grace, _gras_, _rhad_: _addurno_

Graft, _impyn_: _impio_

Grain, _gronyn_

Grand, _mawrwych_

Grant, _rhoddiad_: _rhoddi_

Grape, _gwinronyn_

Grasp, _crafangiad_: _crafangu_

Grass, _glaswellt_

Grate, _alch_, _gradell_

Grave, _bedd_; _difrif_, _sobr_

Graze, _pori_

Great, _mawr_

Green, _gwyrdd_

Greet, _anerch_, _cyfarch_

Grief, _gofid_

Grind, _malu_

Groan, _uchenaid_: _ucheneidio_

Groat, _pedair ceiniog_; _rhynion_

Groom, _marchwas_

Gross, _tew_, _bras_; _cyfanrif_

Grove, _celli_, _gwigfa_

Group, _twr_; _lluaws_

Growl, _chwyrnu_

Grown, _tyfedig_

Grunt, _rhoch_: _rhochian_

Guard, _gwyliadwriaeth_: _gwylied_

Guess, _amcan_: _dyfalu_

Guest, _gwestai_, _gwestwr_

Guide, _hyfforddwr_: _hyfforddio_

Guile, _twyll_

Guilt, _euogrwydd_

Halve, _hanneru_

Harsh, _garw_, _llym_

Haste, _brys_, _ffrwst_: _brysio_

Hatch, _deoriad_: _deori_

Haunt, _cyrchfa_: _cynniwair_

Heath, _grug_; _grugos_

Heart, _calon_

Heave, _codiad_: _codi_

Hedge, _gwrych_: _cau_

Hence, _oddi yma_; _ymaith_

Hinge, _cilfach_, _colyn drws_

Hoard, _cuddfa_: _casglu_

Hoist, _dyrchafu_, _codi i fynu_

Horse, _ceffyl_, _march_: _marchu_

Hound, _buadgi_

House, _ty_: _dwyn i dy_

Joint, _cymmal_; _cysswllt_

Joist, _trawst_, _dist_

Judge, _barnwr_: _barnu_

Juice, _nodd_, _sudd_

Knave, _dyhiryn_

Knead, _tylino_

Kneel, _penlinio_

Knell, _cnul_, _clul_

Knife, _cyllell_

Knock, _cnoc_: _cnocio_, _curo_

Known, _hysbys_

Lance, _gwaewffon_: _agor dolur_

Lapse, _llithrad_: _llithro_

Large, _mawr_, _helaeth_

Latch, _clicied_: _clicciedu_

Lathe, _troell_, _turn_

Laugh, _chwerthin_

Learn, _dysgu_

Lease, _ammodrwym_

Least, _lleiaf_

Leave, _cenad_: _gadael_

Ledge, _ymylfa_

Leech, _geloden_

Liege, _ffyddlawn_

Light, _goleu_; _ysgafn_: _goleuo_

Loath, _anewyllysgar_

Lodge, _lletty_: _llettya_

Loose, _gollwng_, _dattod_

Louse, _lleuen_: _lleua_

Lungs, _ysgyfaint_

Mange, _clafr_

March, _Mawrth_: _ymdeithio_

Marsh, _morfa_

Match, _dylwyfyn_: _cymharu_

Means, _moddion_

Might, _nerth_, _grym_

Milch, _llaethog_

Mince, _mânfriwio_

Mirth, _llawenydd_

Moist, _llaith_

Month, _mis_

Mould, _pridd_; _mold_: _moldio_

Moult, _bwrw plu_

Mound, _clawdd_: _amgau_

Mount, _bryn_: _esgyn_

Mourn, _galaru_, _cwyno_

Mouse, _llygoden_: _llygotta_

Mouth, _safn_, _ceg_: _cegu_

Mulct, _dirwy_: _dirwyo_

Needs, _rheidiau_, _rhaid_

Neigh, _gweryriad_: _gweryru_

Nerve, _gewyn_

Niece, _nith_

Night, _nos_, _noson_

Noise, _twrf_, _swn_

North, _gogledd_

Nurse, _mammaeth_: _magu_

Nymph, _duwies y coedydd_

Ought, _dylu_

Ounce, _wns_

Paint, _paent_: _paentio_

Parch, _crasu_; _deifio_

Parse, _gramadegu_, _geirdreiglo_

Paste, _toes_; _glud_: _gludio_

Patch, _clwt_: _clytio_

Pause, _gorphwysiad_: _gorphwys_

Peace, _heddwch_

Pearl, _gem_

Pence, _ceiniogau_

Perch, _trostan_; _trostlath_

Piece, _dryll_; _darn_: _darnio_

Piles, _clwyf y marchogion_, _peils_

Pinch, _gwasgfa_: _pinsio_

Pitch, _pyg_: _pygu_; _taflu_

Place, _lle_, _man_: _gosod_

Plaid, _brithwe_

Plain, _gwastadedd_

Plane, _llyfnhau_

Plant, _planigyn_: _planu_

Plate, _plâd_: _arwisgo ag aur_, _&c._

Plead, _dadleu_

Plough, _arad_: _aredig_

Pluck, _tyniad_: _tynu_

Plumb, _plymio_

Poach, _lledferwi_; _herwhela_

Point, _pwynt_: _pwyntio_

Poize, _cydbwys_: _cydbwyso_

Porch, _porth_

Pouch, _coden_, _bolgwd_

Pound, _pwys_; _punt_: _pwyo_

Press, _argraffwasg_: _gwasgu_

Price, _pris_, _gwerth_

Pride, _balchder_: _balchio_

Prime, _cyntaf_, _penaf_, _prif_

Print, _argraff_: _argraffu_

Prism, _rheiddell_, _gwydryn y lliwiau_

Prize, _gwobr_: _prisio_

Prone, _gogwyddol_, _tueddol_

Prong, _fforch_

Proof, _prawf_

Prose, _rhyddiaith_

Proud, _balch_

Prove, _profi_

Prowl, _crwydrhela_

Prune, _sycheirynen_: _ysgythru_

Psalm, _salm_, _cân_

Pulse, _curiad_, _curiad y galon_

Punch, _tylliedydd_: _tyllu_

Purge, _carthiedydd_: _carthu_

Purse, _cod_

Quack, _crachfeddyg_: _gwaghoni_

Quail, _sofliar_

Quake, _crynu_

Quart, _chwart_

Queen, _brenines_

Queer, _digrif_, _ysmala_

Quell, _gorthrechu_, _llonyddu_

Quest, _ymofyniad_

Quick, _byw_, _bywiog_

Quill, _asgellfon_

Quilt, _cwrlid_: _arwnïo_

Quire, _drefa_

Quite, _yn gwbl_

Quote, _dyfynu_

Raise, _codi_, _cyfodi_

Range, _rhestr_, _rhes_: _rhestru_

Reach, _cyrhaedd_: _cyrhaeddyd_

Realm, _llywodraeth_

Reeve, _goruchwyliwr_

Reign, _teyrnasiad_: _teyrnasu_

Rhyme, _odl_: _odli_

Ridge, _trum_: _trumio_

Right, _iawn_, _uniawn_; _hawl_

Roast, _rhost_: _rhostio_

Rogue, _dyhiryn_

Roost, _ieirglwyd_: _clwydo_

Rough, _garw_

Round, _cylch_; _crwn_: _amgrynu_

Rouse, _dihuno_

Route, _ffordd_, _taith_

Saint, _sant_

Salve, _eli_: _elïo_

Scald, _berwlosg_: _llaithlosgi_

Scale, _cen_; _clorian_: _dringo_

Scalp, _croen y pen_

Scape, _diangfa_: _diangc_

Scate, _llithrwadn_: _llithrwadnu_

Scene, _golwg_, _golygfa_

Scent, _arogl_: _arogli_

Scoff, _gwawd_: _gwawdio_

Scold, _clewtan_: _clewtian_

Scoop, _ceueg_: _ceuegu_

Scope, _bwriad_, _tuedd_

Score, _ugain_: _nodi_

Scorn, _dirmyg_: _dirmygu_

Scour, _ysgwrio_, _glânrwbio_

Scrap, _dernyn_

Screw, _sidrych_: _sidrychu_

Scrip, _ysgrepan_

Scrub, _dwysrwbio_

Sedge, _hesg_, _merydd_

Seeth, _araferwi_, _poethiasu_

Seize, _gafael_, _ymafaelyd_

Sense, _synwyr_, _deall_

Serve, _gwasanaethu_

Shade, _cysgod_: _cysgodi_

Shaft, _paladr_; _mwndwll_

Shake, _sigliad_: _siglo_

Shall, _caf_, _cawn_, _&c._

Shame, _cywilydd_: _cywilyddio_

Shape, _llun_: _llunio_

Share, _rhan_: _rhanu_

Shark, _morgi_, _gwynforgi_

Sharp, _llym_: _hudladrata_

Shave, _eillio_

Sheaf, _ysgub_: _rhwymo yn ysgubau_

Shear, _cneifio_

Sheep, _dafad_, pl. _defaid_

Sheet, _llen_; _cynfas_

Shelf, _talfaingc_, _silff_

Shell, _cragen_: _diblisgio_

Shift, _crys merch_; _ymdro_: _ymdaro_; _newid_

Shine, _dysgleirio_

Shire, _sir_, _swydd_

Shirt, _crys_

Shoal, _lluaws_; _basle_

Shock, _siglad_: _brawychu_

Shoot, _blaguryn_: _blaguro_; _saethu_

Shore, _glan y môr_: _attegu_

Shorn, _cneifiedig_

Short, _byr_

Shout, _bloedd_: _bloeddio_

Shrew, _cecres_

Shrub, _manwydden_

Siege, _gwarchae_

Sieve, _gogr_

Sight, _golwg_; _edrychiad_

Since, _gan_; _er_, _er pan_

Singe, _deifio_

Sixth, _chweched_

Skill, _medr_

Skull, _penglog_

Slack, _manlo_; _yslac_: _llacio_

Slain, _lladdedig_

Slant, _ar osgo_: _osgoi_

Slate, _llech_: _toi a llechi_

Slave, _caethwas_: _gorweithio_

Sleek, _llyfn_: _llyfnhau_

Sleep, _cwsg_: _cysgu_

Sleet, _odwlaw_

Slept, _cysgedig_

Slice, _tafell_: _tafellu_

Slide, _llithrfa_: _llithro_

Slime, _dyglist_

Sling, _tafl_: _taflu_

Sloes, _eirin perthi_

Sloop, _llongan_, _llong un hwylbren_

Slope, _osgo_: _osgoi_

Sloth, _diogi_

Small, _bach_, _bychan_

Smart, _llym_; _bywiog_: _gwynio_

Smell, _arogl_: _arogli_

Smelt, _brwyniad_: _mwndoddi_

Smile, _gwên_: _gwenu_

Smite, _taro_, _curo_

Smith, _gof_

Smoke, _mwg_: _mygu_

Snail, _malwen_

Snake, _neidr_

Snare, _magl_: _maglu_

Snarl, _chwyrniad_: _chwyrnu_

Snead, _troed pladur_

Sneak, _llech_: _llechian_

Sneer, _gwatwarwen_: _gwatwarwenu_

Snipe, _myniar_

Snore, _chwyrniad_: _chwyrnu_

Snout, _trwyn anifail_, _mildrwyn_

Snuff, _trwynlwch_: _ffroeni_

Solve, _agor_, _dehongli_

Sooth, _gwiredd_: _boddio_, _lliniaru_

Sough, _ffos gudd_, _cuddffos_

Sound, _sain_; _dianaf_: _seinio_

South, _deau_

Space, _cyfwng_

Spade, _rhaw_

Spare, _cynnil_: _cynnilo_

Spark, _gwreichionen_

Spasm, _cwlwm gwythi_

Spawn, _grawn_: _hilio_

Speak, _llefaru_

Spear, _gwaewffon_

Speed, _brys_; _cyflymder_: _brysio_

Spell, _cyfaredd_: _sillafu_

Spend, _treulio_, _gwario_; _afradloni_

Spice, _llysieuo_, _perlysieuo_

Spike, _hoelen hir_: _hoelio_

Spill, _dernyn_: _colli gwlyb_

Spine, _asgwrn y cefn_

Spire, _clochdy blaenfain_, _meindwr_

Spite, _cenfigen_

Split, _hollti_

Spoil, _anrhaith_: _anrheithio_

Spoke, _adain olwyn_

Spool, _gwerthyd_

Spoon, _llwy_

Sport, _digrifwch_: _ymddigrifo_

Spout, _pistyll_: _pystyllio_

Sprig, _brigyn_

Spurn, _gwrthwingo_

Stack, _das_: _dasu_

Staff, _pawl_, _cudosgordd_

Stage, _esgynlawr_

Stake, _pawl_: _cyngwystlo_

Stale, _hen_, _henaidd_

Stalk, _paladr_

Stall, _côr_; _marchnadfaingc_

Stamp, _argraff_: _pwyo_

Stand, _safle_: _sefyll_

Stare, _llygadrythiad_: _llygadrythu_

Start, _rhuthr_: _cychwyn_

State, _cyflwr_; _llywodraeth_: _gosod ger bron_

Steal, _lladrata_

Steam, _agerdd_: _agerddu_

Steed, _march_, _ceffyl_

Steel, _dur_: _durio_

Steep, _dibyn_: _mwydo_

Steer, _bustach_: _llywio_

Stern, _llyw llong_; _y pen ol_; _sarug_

Stick, _ffon_: _glynu_

Stiff, _anystwyth_

Stile, _camfa_

Still, _dysdyllbair_; _llonydd_: _llonyddu_

Sting, _conyn_: _pigo_

Stink, _drewi_

Stoat, _carlwm_

Stock, _bon_; _golud_: _ystorio_

Stoke, _tânyddiaeth_

Stone, _careg_; _8 bwys o gig_: _llabyddio_

Stool, _maingc_, _ystôl_

Stoop, _plygu_

Store, _trysor_, _ystôr_: _trysori_

Stork, _ciconia_

Storm, _tymmestl_; _rhuthrgyrch_

Stove, _twymdy_; _twymiadur_

Stout, _mawr_, _cadarn_

Strap, _ffrewyll_: _ffrewyllu_

Straw, _gwellt_

Stray, _crwydryn_: _crwydro_

Strew, _taenu_

Strip, _llain_: _diosg_

Stuff, _defnydd_: _tynlenwi_

Stump, _boncyff_

Style, _dull_, _modd_

Suite, _cyfres_; _cymdeithion_

Swain, _iangwr_, _gwladwr_

Swamp, _cors_, _siglen_

Sward, _tonen_

Swarm, _haid_: _heidio_

Swear, _tyngu_

Sweat, _chwys_: _chwysu_

Sweep, _ysgubwr_: _ysgubo_

Sweet, _melus_

Swell, _chwydd_: _chwyddo_

Swift, _cyflym_

Swine, _moch_

Swing, _siglbraff_: _siglhongian_

Sword, _cleddyf_

Sworn, _tyngedig_

Taint, _llwgr_, _llygriad_: _llygru_

Taste, _archwaeth_: _archwaethu_

Teach, _addysgu_, _dysgu_

Tease, _aflonyddu_

Teeth, _dannedd_

Tense, _amser_

Tempt, _hudo_, _denu_

Tenth, _degfed_

Thank, _diolch_

Theft, _lladrad_

Their, _eu_

Theme, _testun_

There, _yno_, _yna_

These, _y rhai hyn_

Thick, _tew_, _ffurf_

Thief, _lleidr_

Thigh, _morddwyd_

Thine, _eiddot_

Thing, _peth_

Think, _meddwl_, _tybio_

Third, _trydydd_

Thorn, _draenen_

Those, _y rhai hyny_

Three, _tri_, _tair_

Throw, _tafl_: _taflu_

Thumb, _bawd_: _bodio_

Thump, _dyrnod_: _dyrnodio_

Tight, _tyn_; _cyfyng_

Tinct, _lliw_: _lliwio_

Tithe, _degwm_: _degymu_

Toast, _crasfara_: _crasu_

Tongs, _gefail_

Tooth, _dant_

Torch, _ffaglen_, _canwyll gwyr_

Touch, _teimlad_: _teimlo_, _cyffwrdd_

Tough, _gwydn_

Trace, _ol_: _olrhain_

Track, _ol_, _arlwybr_

Tract, _rhandir_; _traethodyn_

Trade, _masnach_: _masnachu_

Train, _cyfres_: _hyfforddi_

Trait, _llinell_; _ergyd_

Trash, _sothach_

Tread, _sathr_: _sathru_

Treat, _rhad-wledd_: _rhad-wledda_

Tribe, _llwyth_, _tylwyth_

Trick, _ystrangc_: _twyllo_

Troop, _byddindorf_: _llu_

Trout, _brithyll_

Truce, _byr heddwch_

Truck, _newidwriaeth_: _cyfnewid_

Trunk, _cyff_, _boncyff_

Truss, _byrniad_: _byrnio_

Trust, _ymddiried_: _coelio_

Truth, _gwirionedd_

Twang, _clec_, _seindon_: _clecian_, _cydseinio_

Twice, _dwywaith_

Twine, _llinyn cyfrodedd_

Twirl, _chwyrndro_: _chwyrndroi_

Twist, _nydd-dro_, _nydd_: _nydd-droi_

Vague, _crwydrol_; _diystyr_

Valve, _ceuaden_

Vault, _daiargell_: _bwäu_

Venge, _dial_

Verge, _cylch_, _terfyn_: _tueddu_

Verse, _adnod_, _gwers_

Voice, _llef_, _llais_

Vouch, _gwirio_

Waist, _gwasg_

Wales, _Cymru_

Waste, _anial_; _ofer_: _gwastraffu_

Watch, _oriadur_; _gwyliadwriaeth_: _gwylio_

Weave, _gwau_

Wedge, _cŷn_: _cynio_

Weigh, _pwyso_

Welsh, _Cymreig_; _Cymraeg_

Whale, _morfil_

Wharf, _porthfa_

Wheat, _gwenith_

Wheel, _olwyn_: _chwyldroi_

Whelp, _cenaw_

Where, _pa le_, _pa fan_

Which, _pwy_, _pa un_

While, _enyd_, _amser_

Whisp, _tusw_

White, _gwyn_

Whole, _cwbl_, _cyfan_

Whore, _putain_: _puteinio_

Whose, _eiddo pwy_

Width, _lled_

Wince, _gwingo_

Winch, _dyrwynai_

Withe, _gwden_

Witch, _dewines_

World, _byd_

Worse, _gwaeth_

Worst, _gwaethaf_

Worth, _gwerth_

Wound, _archoll_: _archolli_

Wrath, _llid_

Wreck, _llongddrylliad_

Wring, _gwasg_: _gwasgu_

Wrist, _arddwn_

Write, _ysgrifenu_

Wrong, _cam_: _niweidio_

Wrote, _ysgrifenwyd_

Wroth, _digllawn_

Yacht, _tlysfad_, _ceinlong_

Yearn, _dwysdeimlo_

Yeast, _burym_

Yield, _gildio_, _ymostwng_

Young, _ieuangc_

Yours, _eiddoch_

Youth, _dyn ieuangc_




WORDS OF SIX LETTERS.



Bleach, _canu_, _gwynu_, _gwynhau_

Blight, _golosgiad_: _golosgi_

Bought, _prynedig_

Branch, _cangen_: _cangenu_

Breach, _adwy_, _rhwyg_

Breast, _bron_, _dwyfron_, _brest_

Breath, _anadl_

Breeze, _awel_, _chwa_

Bridge, _pont_

Bright, _gloyw_, _ysblenydd_

Bronze, _lliw pres_, _presliw_

Browse, _brigdori_

Bruise, _clais_, _yssigiad_: _yssigo_

Chance, _damwain_: _dygwyddo_

Change, _aralliad_: _cyfnewid_

Charge, _cadwraeth_; _gorchymmyn_: _ymddiried_; _cyhuddo_; _ymosod_

Chaste, _diwair_, _dihalog_

Cheese, _caws_

Choice, _dewisol_, _dewis_

Choose, _dewis_, _ethol_

Church, _eglwys_: _eglwysa_

Clause, _adran_, _erthygl_

Cleave, _hollti_; _glynu_

Clench, _rhybedio_

Clothe, _dilladu_, _gwisgo_

Coarse, _garw_, _bras_

Corpse, _celain_, _corph marw_

Course, _ystod_, _gyrfa_: _hela_; _rhedeg_

Crease, _ol plygiad_: _crychiadu_

Cruise, _gwylfordwyaeth_: _gwibfordwyo_

Crutch, _bagl_, _ffon fagl_

Dearth, _prinder_; _newyn_

Drudge, _cystogwr_: _cystogi_

Fierce, _gerwin_, _creulawn_

Fledge, _magu plu_, _plufu_, _pluenu_

Fleece, _cnu_, _cnuf_: _cneifio_

Flight, _hedfa_; _ffoad_

Flinch, _rhuso_, _ymollwng_

Flitch, _hannoreb_

Fourth, _pedwarfed_

Freeze, _rhewi_

Friend, _cyfaill_

Fright, _arswyd_, _ofn_: _brawychu_

Glance, _cipolwg_: _cipedrych_

Grains, _grawn_; _soeg_

Grease, _irad_, _saim_: _iro_

Greece, _gwlad Groeg_

Greens, _bresych_; _cawl_

Grieve, _gofidio_, _galaru_

Groove, _rhigol_: _rhigoli_

Ground, _llawr_, _sail_: _seilio_; _maluredig_

Growth, _twf_, _tyfiant_

Grudge, _dygasedd_: _gwarafun_

Halves, _hanneru_

Health, _iechyd_

Hearse, _elor-gerbyd_, _corffglud_

Hearth, _aelwyd_

Height, _uchder_

Hoarse, _cryg_; _cryglyd_

Knight, _marchog_

Launch, _cynnofio_, _llonghyffio_, _morhau_

League, _cyfammod_: _cynghreirio_

Length, _hyd_, _hirder_

Lights, _ysgyfaint_

Loathe, _ffieiddio_, _casäu_

Naught, _dim_; _drwg_

Nought, _dim_, _diddym_

Phlegm, _cornboer_

Phleme, _fflaim_, _cyllell waedu_

Phrase, _geiriad_, _ymadrodd_: _geirio_

Pierce, _gwanu_, _tyllu_

Plague, _pla_: _plaau_

Please, _boddhau_; _gweled yn dda_

Pledge, _gwystl_: _gwystlo_

Plough, _arad_, _ylltyd_: _arddu_, _aredig_

Plunge, _trochiad_: _trochi_

Praise, _mawl_: _canmol_

Preach, _pregethu_

Priest, _offeiriad_

Prince, _tywysog_

Prompt, _parod_, _dioed_: _cofweini_; _helpu_

Quench, _diffoddi_; _dofi_

Scarce, _prin_, _anaml_; _odid_

Scheme, _cynllun_, _dyfais_

Schism, _rhwyg eglwysig_, _sism_

School, _ysgol_: _ysgolori_

Scrape, _craflwy_: _crafu_

Scream, _crochwaedd_: _ysgrechu_

Screen, _cysgodlen_: _gwasgodi_

Scribe, _ysgrifenydd_

Scruff, _addail_

Scythe, _pladur_

Search, _chwiliad_: _chwilio_

Selves, _hunain_

Shades, _cysgodolion_

Sheath, _gwain_: _gweinio_

Shears, _gwellaif_

Shield, _tarian_: _tarianu_

Should, _dyly_

Shriek, _crochlais_: _crochleisio_

Shrill, _llym_, _uchelseiniol_

Shrink, _crebachu_, _cilio yn ol_

Shroud, _amdo_: _amdoi_

Sketch, _cynllun_: _cynllunio_

Skirts, _godre_, _ymyl_: _ymylu_

Sleeve, _llawes_

Slight, _ysgafn_; _dirmyg_: _dirmygu_

Sluice, _dyfrddor_: _dwfr ollwng_

Smooth, _llyfn_, _gwastad_: _llyfnäu_

Sneeze, _tisiad_: _tisio_

Sought, _ceisiedig_

Source, _ffynnonell_, _tarddiad_

Speech, _araeth_, _lleferydd_

Sphere, _cronell_; _cylch_

Splash, _arwlychu_; _lleidio_

Spleen, _y ddueg_

Splice, _rhaffgymhlethu_, _rhaffgydio_

Splint, _dysgloen_

Spouse, _dyweddi_, _priod_

Sprain, _tyrfiad_: _yssigo_

Spread, _taeniad_: _taenu_

Spring, _tarddiad_; _gwanwyn_: _tarddu_

Sprout, _blaendarddu_

Spunge, _ysbwng_: _ysbyngu_

Squall, _awel ddisyfyd_: _ysgrechian_

Square, _ysgwar_: _ysgwario_

Squeak, _gwichlef_: _gwichio_

Squint, _gŵyr_: _llygadwyro_

Squirt, _chwistrell_: _chwistrellu_

Stairs, _grisiau_

Starch, _syth_: _sythu_

Starve, _newynu_; _rhynu_

Staves, _ffyn_; _erwydd_

Stench, _drewdod_

Stitch, _pwyth_: _pwytho_

Stocks, _cyffion_

Strain, _dirdroad_: _dirdroi_

Strait, _cyfyngfor_; _cyfyng_; _cyfyngder_

Strand, _traeth_: _rhedeg ar draeth_

Stream, _ffrwd_: _ffrydio_

Street, _heol_, _ystryd_

Stress, _pwys_, _gwasgfa_

Strict, _cyfyng_, _caeth_

Stride, _hirgam_: _hirgamu_

Strife, _cynhen_, _ymryson_

Strike, _cyfor_: _taro_; _iselu_

String, _llinyn_: _llinynu_

Stripe, _llinellres_: _llinellresu_

Strive, _ymegnio_, _ymdrechu_

Stroke, _dyrnod_: _llochi_

Strong, _cryf_, _galluog_

Swerve, _gwyro_, _troi ymaith_

Switch, _gwialenig_: _gwialenodi_

Taught, _dysgedig_

Teethe, _magu dannedd_

Thanks, _diolch_

Thatch, _to gwellt_: _toi_

Theirs, _eiddynt_

Thence, _oddi yno_, _o hyny_

Thieve, _lladrata_

Thirst, _syched_: _sychedu_

Though, _er_, _er hyny_, _pe_

Thrash, _dyrnu_

Thread, _edau_, _edafedd_: _edafu_

Threap, _ymresymu_; _ymdaeru_

Threat, _bygwth_, _dwrd_

Thrice, _teirgwaith_

Thrive, _llwyddo_, _ffynu_, _cynnyddu_

Throat, _corn y gwddf_

Throne, _gorsedd_: _gorseddu_

Throng, _tyrfa_: _tynlenwi_

Thrush, _bronfraith_

Thrust, _gwth_: _gwthio_

Thwart, _croes_: _rhwystro_

Tongue, _tafod_; _tafodiaeth_

Trance, _llewyg_, _llesmair_

Trench, _ffos_, _clawdd_: _ffosi_, _cloddio_

Trough, _cafn_

Twelve, _deuddeg_

Wealth, _cyfoeth_, _golud_

Weight, _pwys_, _pwysigrwydd_

Whence, _o ba le_; _pan_

Wreath, _amdorch_: _amdorchi_

Wrench, _dirdro_: _dirdroi_

Wretch, _adyn_, _truenyn_

Wright, _saer_




WORDS OF SEVEN AND EIGHT LETTERS.



Breadth, _lled_

Breathe, _anadlu_

Brought, _dygiedig_

Cleanse, _glanhau_, _puro_

Clothes, _dillad_, _gwisgoedd_

Draught, _traflwngc_, _llymaid_

Drought, _sychder_, _gwres_

Freight, _llwyth llong_: _llong lwytho_

Glimpse, _golewyrch_; _cipolwg_

Grounds, _seiliau_; _gwaddodion_

Scourge, _fflangell_: _fflangellu_

Scratch, _crip_, _cripiad_: _cripio_

Seventh, _seithfed_

Sleight, _cyfrwysdro_

Springe, _croglath_

Sprouts, _adfresych_

Squeeze, _gwasg_: _gwasgu_

Stealth, _lladrad_

Strange, _dieithr_, _estronol_

Stretch, _estyn_: _tynu_

Straight, _union_, _syth_

Strength, _nerth_, _gallu_

Thought, _meddwl_; _bwriad_

Through, _trwy_; _trwodd_

Twelfth, _deuddegfed_

Wrought, _gwneuthuredig_




WORDS OF TWO SYLLABLES.



A-base, _darostwng_, _iselu_

A-bate, _treio_, _lleihau_; _gostwng_

Ab-bey, _abatty_, _mynachlog_

Ab-bot, _abad_, _penfynach_

Ab-hor, _ffieiddio_, _casäu_

A-bide, _trigo_, _aros_; _goddef_

Ab-ject, _bwrw ymaith_, _gwrthod_

Ab-ject, _distadl_, _gwael_

A-ble, _galluog_, _medrus_; _goludog_

A-board, _ar fwrdd llong_

A-bode, _annedd_; _trigfa_; _arosiad_

A-bove, _uwch_, _goruwch_, _uwchben_

A-bound, _cael gwala_, _meddu digon_

A-bout, _perthynol_; _gerllaw_; _yng nghylch_, _oddeutu_; _tua_

A-bridge, _talfyru_, _crynhoi_

A-broad, _allan_, _ar led_; _oddi cartref_

Ab-rupt, _disymmwth_, _byrbwyll_

Ab-scess, _cornwyd_, _anafod_

Ab-scond, _ymguddio_, _llechu_

Ab-sence, _absennoldeb_, _absen_

Ab-sent, _absennol_: _absennoli_

Ab-solve, _rhyddhau_; _maddeu_

Ab-sorb, _llyngcu_, _sugno_, _difa_

Ab-stain, _ymattal_; _ymgadw_

Ab-stract, _crynodeb_: _crynhoi_

Ab-surd, _afresymol_; _gwrthun_

A-buse, _camdriniaeth_: _camarfer_

A-byss, _eigion_, _pwll diwaelod_

Ac-cede, _cytuno_, _cydsynio_

Ac-cent, _acen_: _acenu_

Ac-cept, _derbyn_

Ac-cess, _dyfodfa_, _nesâd_, _agosiad_

Ac-compt, _rhif_, _cyfrif_

Ac-cord, _cydfod_: _cytuno_; _cyddaro_

Ac-cost, _cyfarch_, _anerch_

Ac-count, _cyfrif_; _cymmeriad_: _rhifo_

Ac-crue, _chwanegu_, _deillio_; _tyfu_

Ac-cuse, _cyhuddo_, _beio_

A-chieve, _cyflawni_; _cwblhau_

A-cid, _sur_, _egr_, _chwibl_

A-corn, _mesen_

Ac-quaint, _hysbysu_, _amlygu_; _arfer_

Ac-quire, _cyrhaedd_, _caffael_; _casglu_

Ac-quit, _rhyddhau_, _cyfiawnhau_

A-cre, _erw_, _cyfar_

Ac-rid, _sur_; _pigog_

A-cross, _yn groes_, _ar draws_

Ac-tion, _gweithred_; _ystum_; _cwyn_; _dadl_; _brwydr_

Ac-tive, _bywiog_, _gweithgar_, _heinif_

A-cute, _awchus_, _llym_; _synwyrol_

Ad-der, _neidr_

Ad-dice, _neddyf_, _bwyell gam_

Ad-dict, _ymroddi_, _diofrydu_

Ad-dle, _gwag_, _clwc_, _gorllyd_

Ad-dress, _cyfarchiad_; _cyfarwyddiad_: _anerch_, _cyfeirio_

Ad-here, _ymlynu_, _glynu wrth_

A-dieu, _bydd wych_, _yn iach_

Ad-journ, _gohirio_, _oedi_

Ad-junct, _darymsawdd_, _chwanegawd_

Ad-jure, _tyngedu_

Ad-just, _cymhwyso_, _trefnu_, _iawni_

Ad-mire, _rhyfeddu_, _mawrygu_, _hoffi_

Ad-mit, _derbyn_, _caniatäu_, _goddef_

A-dopt, _mabwysiadu_

A-dore, _addoli_; _mawrhau_

A-dorn, _addurno_, _trwsio_, _harddu_

Ad-vance, _mynediad_; _cynnydd_: _myned ym mlaen_; _gwelläu_

Ad-vent, _y dyfodiad_, _yr adfent_

Ad-verb, _rhagferf_, _gorair_

Ad-verse, _gwrthwynebus_, _adfydig_

Ad-vert, _ystyried_, _dal sylw_

Ad-vice, _cynghor_; _mynegiad_

Ad-vise, _cynghori_, _annog_

A-dult, _oedog_, _un mewn oed_

Af-fair, _gorchwyl_; _achos_

Af-fect, _serch_; _teimlad_: _cyffroi_; _ceisio_

Af-firm, _haeru_; _sicrhau_, _gwirio_

Af-fix, _cyssawd_: _cydio_, _sicrhau_

Af-flict, _gofidio_, _trallodi_

Af-ford, _rhoddi_, _gweini_; _gallu rhoi_

Af-fray, _ymryson_: _brawychu_

Af-fright, _braw_, _dychryn_

Af-front, _sarhâd_: _difrïo_; _digio_

A-float, _ar nawf_; _yn symmud_

A-fore, _rhag_, _cyn_, _o flaen_

A-fraid, _dychrynedig_; _ofnus_

A-fresh, _o'r newydd_, _eilwaith_, _eto_

Af-ter, _gwedi_, _ar ol_

A-gain, _eilwaith_, _drachefn_, _eto_

A-gainst, _erbyn_, _gyferbyn_, _rhag_

A-ged, _hen_, _oedranus_

A-gent, _goruchwyliwr_, _dirprwy_; _achos_

Ag-gress, _dechreu cynnen_, _ymosod_

Ag-grieve, _blino_, _gormesu_, _poeni_

A-go, _cyn hyn_, _yn ol_

A-gree, _cytuno_, _heddychu_; _cyfateb_

A-gue, _y cryd_, _y ddieithron_

Air-ing, _rhodiad allan_; _twymol_

A-larm, _gwaedd_, _rhybydd_: _dychrynu_

A-las, _och!_ _Och fi!_ _aha_

Al-der, _gwernen_

A-lert, _bywiog_, _heini_, _gwyliadwrus_

A-lien, _allwlad_, _alldud_, _estron_

A-light, _disgyn_, _dyfod i lawr_

A-like, _yn debyg_, _yn gyffelyb_

A-live, _byw_, _yn byw_; _bywiog_

Al-lay, _esmwythhâd_: _tymmeru_; _cymmysgu_; _lliniaru_

Al-lege, _datgan_, _haeru_, _gwirio_

Al-ley, _rhodfa_; _heol gul_

Al-lies, _cynghreiriaid_

Al-lot, _gosod_, _penodi_, _cyfranu_

Al-low, _caniatäu_, _goddef_, _gostwng_

Al-lude, _cyfeirio_; _cyffelybu_

Al-lure, _hudoliaeth_; _hudo_, _denu_

Al-ly, _cynghreiriad_: _ymgyfathrachu_

Al-most, _ym mron_, _agos_, _braidd_

A-lone, _unig_, _unigol_

A-long, _ym mlaen_; _bellach_

A-loud, _yn uchel_, _yn groch_

Al-so, _hefyd_, _yn yr un modd_

Al-tar, _allor_, _allawr_

Al-ter, _arallu_, _newid_

Al-though, _er_, _er hyny_; _pe_, _ped_

Al-ways, _yn wastadol_, _bob amser_

A-mass, _pentyru_; _croni_; _casglu_

A-maze, _aruthredd_, _braw_: _synu_, _brawychu_

A-men, _amen_, _yn wir_; _felly y bo_

A-mend, _adgyweirio_, _adnewyddu_

A-mends, _iawn_, _boddlonrwydd_

A-miss, _ar fai_, _yn feius_

A-mong, A-mongst, _yn_, _ym mhlith_, _rhwng_

Am-ple, _helaeth_; _mawr_; _eang_

A-muse, _difyru_; _hudfoddio_

An-chor, _angor_: _angori_

An-cient, _hen_, _hirhoedlog_; _oesol_

An-cle, _ffer_, _migwrn_

An-gel, _angel_; _cenad_

An-ger, _dig_, _digder_: _digio_, _llidio_

An-gle, _ongl_, _congl_: _pysgota_

An-gry, _dig_, _llidiog_

An-guish, _ing_, _gloes_, _cystudd_

An-nals, _blwyddolion_, _hanesion_

An-nex, _cyssylltiad_: _cyssylltu_

An-nounce, _datgan_, _cyhoeddi_

An-noy, _drygu_; _niweidio_; _blino_

An-nul, _dyddymu_, _dilëu_

A-noint, _iro_, _eneinio_

An-swer, _ateb_, _atebiad_: _atebu_

An-them, _mawlgan_

An-tients, _hynafiaid_, _hynaif_

An-vil, _eingion_

Anx-ious, _pryderus_; _awyddus_

An-y, _unrhyw_; _neb_; _rhyw_

A-part, _ór neilldu_, _ar wahân_

Ap-peal, _appeliad_

Ap-pear, _ymddangos_; _bod yn debyg_

Ap-pease, _gostegu_, _dystewi_

Ap-pend, _crogi wrth_, _cydio_

Ap-plaud, _canmol_, _moli_

Ap-plause, _clod_, _canmoliaeth_

Ap-ple, _afal_

Ap-ply, _cymhwyso_; _ymosod_

Ap-point, _gosod_, _trefnu_, _nodi_

Ap-praise, _prisio_, _cywerthyddio_

Ap-prise, _hysbysu_, _rhybuddio_

Ap-proach, _dynesiad_: _dynesu_

Ap-prove, _cymmeradwyo_; _profi_

A-pril, _Ebrill_

A-pron, _arffedog_; _barclod_

Ar-bour, _gwasgodfa_, _deildy_

Arch-er, _saethydd_, _saethwr_

Ar-dent, _taer_; _awchus_, _gwresog_

Ar-dour, _awyddfryd_; _taerni_

Ar-gue, _dadleu_, _rhesymu_

A-rise, _codi_, _esgyn_

Ar-mour, _arfogaeth_, _rhyfelwisg_

Arm-pit, _cesail_

Ar-my, _llu_, _byddin_

A-round, _o amgylch_, _o bob tu_

A-rouse, _deffroi_, _dihuno_

Ar-range, _trefnu_, _rhesu_

Ar-ray, _gwisg_, _trwsiad_: _addurno_; _trefnu_

Ar-rear, _olddyled_

Ar-rest, _dal_, _dal yn garcharor_

Ar-rive, _dyfod_, _cyrhaedd_, _tirio_

Ar-row, _saeth_, _picell_

Art-ful, _dichellgar_; _hyfedr_

Art-ist, _celfyddŵr_

As-cend, _esgyn_, _dringo_

As-cent, _esgynfa_, _rhiw_, _llethr_

Ash-es, _lludw_, _ulw_

A-shore, _ar y traeth_, _ar lan_

A-side, _ór neilldu_; _ar osgo_

A-sleep, _yn nghwsg_, _yn cysgu_

As-pect, _golygiad_: _edrych_, _tremio_; _sylwi_

As-pire, _uchelgeisio_; _ymgeisio_

As-sail, _ymosod_, _rhuthro_

As-sault, _rhuthr_, _ymosodiad_: _taro_, _ymosod_

As-sent, _cydsyniad_: _cydsynio_

As-sert, _haeru_, _honi_, _gwirio_

As-sess, _trethu_

As-sets, _oleiddo_

As-sign, _penu_, _rhoddi_; _trosi_

As-sist, _cynnorthwyo_; _amdiffyn_

As-size, _brawdlys_: _penodi pris_

As-sort, _cymmathu_, _cyd-drefnu_

As-suage, _llonyddu_, _lliniaru_

As-sume, _cymmeryd_, _ymhoni_

As-sure, _sicrhau_, _gwirio_

Asth-ma, _diffyg anadl_, _mygfa_

A-stray, _ar gyfeiliorn_

At-las, _casgliad o ddarluniau_; _atlas_

At-om, _mymryn_, _brycheuyn_

A-tone, _rhoi iawn_; _cymmodi_

At-tach, _dal_, _attafaelu_

At-tack, _rhuthr_: _gosod_, _ymosod ar_

At-tain, _ennill_; _cyrhaedd_

At-tempt, _anturiaeth_, _cynnyg_: _anturio_, _ceisio_

At-tend, _gofalu_; _gwrando_; _ystyried_; _canlyn_

At-tire, _gwisg_: _gwisgo_, _trwsiadu_

At-tract, _tynu_, _denu_, _llithio_

A-vail, _lles_, _budd_: _llesäu_, _cynnorthwyo_

Auc-tion, _arwerthiant_, _arwerth_

Au-dit, _prawf cyfrifon_; _olrheinio_, _prawiadu_

A-venge, _dial_, _ymddial_

A-ver, _gwirio_, _haeru_, _sicrhau_

A-verse, _gwrthwynebol_, _gelynol_

A-void, _gochel_, _diangc_

A-vow, _addef_; _amddiffyn_

Aug-ment, _cynnyddu_, _ychwanegu_

Au-gust, _Awst_; _arderchog_

Aus-tere, _gerwin_, _creulawn_

Au-thor, _awdwr_, _gwneuthurwr_

Au-tumn, _Hydref_, _cynauaf_

A-wait, _dysgwyl_, _aros_; _gweini_

A-wake, _effro_; _deffro_: _deffroi_

A-ware, _rhagystyriol_, _arwybodus_

A-way, _ymaith_, _ffwrdd_

Aw-ful, _ofnadwy_

A-while, _encyd_, _ennyd_

Awk-ward, _trwsgl_, _chwithig_

Ax-iom, _gwireb_, _gosodiad_

Ax-is, _echel_, _pegwn_

Back-bite, _absennu_, _athrodi_

Back-slide, _gwrthgilio_, _encilio_

Back-ward, _yn ol_; _hwyrfrydig_; _ammharod_

Bad-ger, _broch_, _daiar fochyn_

Baf-fle, _dyrysu_: _siomi_; _trechu_

Bag-gage, _clud_, _celfi llu_

Bai-liff, _maer_; _hafodwr_; _ceisbwl_

Bal-ance, _clorian_; _mantoliaeth_: _pwyso_; _gwastadhau_

Bald-ness, _moelni_, _moeledd_

Bal-loon, _clobyn_; _awyren_

Bal-lot, _coelbren_

Band-age, _rhwymyn_, _gwasgrwym_

Bane-ful, _dinystriol_, _marwol_

Ban-ish, _alldudio_, _deol_

Bank-er, _sylltydd_, _arianydd_

Bank-rupt, _methdalwr_

Ban-ner, _lluman_, _baner_

Ban-quet, _gwledd_: _gwledda_

Bap-tize, _bedyddio_

Barb-er, _eilliwr_, _barfwr_

Bar-gain, _cytundeb_: _cytuno_

Bar-ley, _haidd_, _barlys_

Bar-on, _brëyr_, _barwn_

Bar-rack, _lluest milwr_

Bar-rel, _baril_, _celwrn_

Bar-ren, _anffrwythlon_, _anmhlantadwy_

Bar-row, _berfa_, _carthglwyd_

Bar-ter, _newidwriaeth_: _cyfnewidio_

Bash-ful, _cywilyddgar_, _yswil_

Ba-sin, _cawg_; _nawfle_

Ba-sis, _sail_: _gwaelod_

Bas-ket, _basged_, _cawell_

Bas-tard, _basdardd_, _plentyn ordderch_

Bas-tion, _rhagfur_, _gwrthglawdd_

Bat-tle, _brwydr_: _ymladd_

Bay-salt, _morhalen_

Bay-tree, _llawryf_

Bea-con, _gwylfa_, _tanfwdwl_

Bea-dle, _rhingyll_, _gwysiwr_

Bear-er, _cludydd_, _cynnaliwr_

Bear-ing, _cyfeiriad_; _goddefiad_

Beast-ly, _anifeilaidd_, _aflan_

Beat-ing, _curiad_, _cwrfa_

Beau-ty, _glendid_, _harddwch_

Be-cause, _o herwydd_, _o blegid_, _o achos_; _gan_, _am_

Beck-on, _amneidio_

Be-come, _gweddu_, _perthynu_

Bed-stead, _pren gwely_, _ochr gwely_

Bee-hive, _cwch gwenyn_

Bee-tle, _chwilen ddu_

Be-fall, _dygwydd_; _dyfod_; _darfod_

Be-fore, _o flaen_, _ger bron_, _cyn_

Beg-gar, _cardotyn_: _llymhau_

Be-get, _cenedlu_, _eppilio_

Be-gin, _dechreu_, _cychwyn_

Be-gone, _ymaith_, _ffwrdd_

Be-guile, _hudo_, _llithio_, _denu_, _twyllo_

Be-half, _plaid_, _rhan_, _achos_, _tu_

Be-have, _ymddwyn_, _ymarweddu_

Be-hind, _yn ol_, _ar ol_, _y tu cefn_

Be-hold, _edrych_, _golygu_

Be-ing, _hanfod_, _bod_

Bel-fry, _llofft y gloch_

Be-lief, _ffydd_, _coel_, _crediniaeth_

Be-lieve, _credu_, _coelio_, _ymddiried_

Bel-low, _rhuo_, _brefu_

Bel-lows, _megin_

Bel-ly, _bol_, _bola_; _ceudod_

Be-long, _perthynu_, _deiryd_

Be-loved, _anwylyd_, _cariad_

Be-low, _îs_, _is law_, _oddi tanodd_

Be-moan, _cwyno_, _galaru_

Bend-ed, _plygedig_, _cam_

Bend-ing, _plygiad_, _gogwyddiad_

Be-neath, _îs_, _is law_, _isod_, _obry_

Be-nign, _tirion_, _mwyn_, _hael_

Be-numb, _merwino_, _fferu_

Be-queath, _cymmynu_, _rhoi mewn ewyllys_

Be-quest, _cymmyn_, _cymmynrodd_

Be-reave, _difuddio_, _difeddu_

Be-seech, _attolygu_, _deisyf erfyn_

Be-side, Be-sides, _ger llaw_, _wrth_, _yn ymyl_, _heb law_; _gyda_, _oddi
eithr_, _hefyd_

Be-siege, _gwarchae_, _amgylchu_

Be-som, _ysgubell_, _ysgub_

Be-stow, _rhoddi_, _anrhegu_

Be-tray, _bradychu_, _cyhuddo_

Bet-ter, _gwell_: _gwellau_

Be-tween, Be-twixt, _rhwng_, _yn mysg_

Be-wail, _cwyno_, _galaru_

Be-ware, _gochel_, _ymgadw_

Be-yond, _dros_, _tra_, _tu hwnt i_, _ym mhellach_

Bi-as, _tueddiad_: _tueddu_; _denu_

Bi-ble, _y Llyfr_, _y Bibl_

Bid-den, _gwahoddedig_: _wedi ei gynnyg_

Bid-ding, _gwahoddiad_; _cyhoeddiad_

Bid-ing, _trigias_, _arosiad_

Big-ot, _dyn penboeth_, _dallbleidiwr_

Bil-ious, _gerïog_

Bil-let, _byrlythyr_; _nodyn_

Bil-low, _ton_, _moryn_

Bind-ing, _rhwymiad_; _ymylwisgiad_

Bi-ped, _creadur deudroed_

Bird-lime, _glud_, _ysgrawling_

Birth-day, _dydd genedigaeth_

Bis-cuit, _bara caled_, _teisen galed_

Bish-op, _esgob_, _golygwr_

Bi-sect, _deubarthu_, _rhanu_

Bit-ter, _chwerw_, _bustlaidd_, _tost_

Bi-valve, _deufasglog_; _dwygragenog_

Black-bird, _mwyalch_, _yr aderyn du_

Black-guard, _dyhiryn_, _drygadyn_

Black-smith, _gof_, _gof du_

Blad-der, _pledren_, _chwysigen_

Blame-less, _difai_, _diargyhoedd_

Blan-ket, _brycan_, _gwrthban_

Blas-pheme, _cablu_, _difenwi_

Blast-ing, _deifiad_, _malldod_; _seithugiad_

Bleach-ing, _caniad_, _gwyniad_

Bleak-ness, _oerni_; _fferdod_

Bleed-ing, _gwaediad_; _gwaedlif_

Blem-ish, _anaf_, _bai_: _anafu_, _niweidio_

Bless-ed, _bendigedig_, _gwynfydedig_

Bless-ing, _bendith_, _llad_

Blind-fold, _mygydol_: _mygydu_; _dallu_

Blind-ness, _dallnieb_, _dellni_

Blind-worm, _madfall_, _dallneidr_

Blis-ter, _chwydalen_: _chwydalu_

Bloat-ed, _chwyddedig_: _balchaidd_

Block-ade, _argae_, _gwarchae_

Block-head, _penbwl_, _hurtyn_

Blood-shot, _y fflameg_, _gwaedglais_

Blood-y, _gwaedlyd_, _creulawn_

Blos-som, _blodeuo_, _blaguro_

Bloom-ing, _blodeuog_; _gwridog_

Blow-ing, _chwythiad_; _gwyntog_

Blun-der, _amryfusedd_; _coll_: _camsynied_

Blunt-ness, _pylni_, _pyledd_

Blunt-ly, _yn bwl_, _yn ddiawch_

Blush-ing, _gwridog_; _gwylaidd_

Boat-swain, _penbadwr_

Bo-dy, _corph_, _un_; _swrn_, _crynodeb_

Boil-er, _callawr_, _pair_, _berwedydd_

Boil-ing, _berw_, _berwad_, _berwedig_

Bold-ness, _hyfder_; _haerllugrwydd_

Bol-ster, _gobenydd_: _attegu_

Bom-bard, _llosbeliad_: _llosbelu_

Bond-age, _caethiwed_, _carchar_

Bon-fire, _coelcerth_, _banffagl_

Bord-er, _ffin_, _terfyn_; _godre_

Bo-rough, _bwrdeisdref_

Bor-row, _echwyna_, _benthyca_

Bo-som, _mynwes_: _mynwesu_

Bot-tle, _potel_, _costrel_: _costrelu_

Bot-tom, _gwaelod_, _sylfaen_

Bound-less, _annherfynol_

Boun-ty, _haelioni_, _rhadlonedd_

Bow-els, _ymysgar_, _coluddion_

Brace-let, _breichled_

Brack-et, _ysgwyddyn_; _camfach_

Brac-ing, _cyfrwymiad_, _cryfhâd_

Brack-ish, _hallt_, _helïaidd_

Braid-ed, _plethedig_, _crych_

Bram-ble, _mieren_, _dyrysïen_

Brand-ish, _ysgwyd_; _chwyrnellu_

Bra-zen, _efyddaidd_; _haerllug_

Break-ers, _beisdon_, _beisdonau_

Break-fast, _boreubryd_

Breast-plate, _dwyfroneg_

Breath-ing, _chwythiad_, _anadliad_

Breth-ren, _brodyr_, _brodorion_

Brick-bat, _darn o briddfaen_

Brick-kiln, _odyn priddfeini_

Bride-groom, _priodfab_, _priodasfab_

Bride-maid, _llawforwyn_, _morwyn priodas_

Bride-well, _carchar_

Bri-dle, _ffrwyn_: _ffrwyno_

Brief-ly, _yn fyr_, _ar fyr eiriau_

Bri-er, _mieren_, _dyrysïen_

Brig-ade, _byddindorf_

Bright-ness, _gloywder_, _dysgleirdeb_

Bril-liant, _claerwych_; _ardderchog_

Brim-stone, _mygfaen_, _llosgfaen_

Bris-tle, _gwrychyn_: _gwrychio_

Brit-tle, _brau_, _breuol_

Broad-side, _ystlys ergydion_

Bro-kage, _cyflog werthiad_, _maeldal_

Bro-ker, _cyflog werthydd_, _trosfasnachwr_

Brok-en, _drylliedig_, _toredig_

Broth-er, _brawd_

Brows-ing, _brigboriad_

Bruis-ing, _yssigiad maluriad_

Brush-wood, _manwydd_

Bru-tal, _anifeilaidd_; _creulawn_

Bub-ble, _bwrlwm_: _bwrlymu_

Buck-et, _ystwc_, _celwrn_, _crwc_

Buc-kle, _boglwm_: _boglymu_

Bud-ding, _blaguriad_

Bud-get, _cwd_, _coden_; _cynnygiad_

Build-er, _adeiladydd_, _adeiladwr_

Build-ing, _adail_, _adeilad_, _adeiladaeth_

Bul-let, _pelen_, _pelen gwn_

Bul-lock, _bustach_, _eidion_, _ych_

Bul-ly, _byglwr_: _hyllddwrdio_

Bul-wark, _gwrthglawdd_, _rhagfur_, _amddiffynfa_

Bun-dle, _sypyn_, _bwrn_: _sypynu_

Buoy-ant, _nofiawl_, _ysgafn_

Bur-den, _baich_: _beichio_

Bu-reau, _ysgrifengist_

Bur-gess, _dinesydd_, _bwrdais_

Burg-lar, _ty dorwr_

Burn-ing, _llosg_, _llosgiad_

Bur-nish, _caboli_, _gloywi_

Bur-row, _tyllu_, _daiaru_

Bur-then, _baich_, _pwn_, _llwyth_

Bur-y, _claddu_, _beddu_, _priddo_

Bus-iness, _galwad_, _gwaith_, _swydd_

Bus-y, _diwyd_, _llafurus_, _prysur_

Butch-er, _cigydd_: _cigyddio_

But-ler, _trulliad_, _heilyn_

But-ter, _ymenyn_

But-ton, _botwm_: _botymu_

But-tress, _atteg_: _attegu_

By-law, _deddf leol_; _gogyfraith_

By-street, _heol gefn_, _coegheol_

Cab-bage, _bresych_, _cawl_: _bresychu_; _darnguddio_

Cab-in, _caban_, _cell_, _lluest_

Ca-ble, _rhaff angor_

Ca-dence, _gostyngiad_; _goslef_: _seinamrywio_

Cal-cine, _calchlosgi_

Call-ing, _galwedigaeth_; _celfyddyd_

Calm-ness, _tawelwch_; _llareidd-dra_

Cam-paign, _rhyfelawd_: _rhyfelodi_, _maesgyrchu_

Ca-nal, _dyfrffos_

Can-cel, _dileu_, _dirymu_

Can-cer, _cancr_, _dafaden wyllt_

Can-did, _teg_; _gonest_, _diduedd_

Can-dle, _canwyll_

Can-dour, _tegwch_, _hynawsedd_

Ca-nine, _ciaidd_, _ciol_

Can-ker, _cancr_, _rhwd_: _rhydu_

Can-non, _magnel_, _cyflegr_

Ca-noe, _ceubal_, _cwch_

Ca-non, _canon_, _rheol_, _gosodiad_

Can-vass, _sachlian_, _cywarchlen_: _holi_; _pleidgeisio_

Ca-price, _chwidredd_, _gwamaldyb_

Cap-stan, _dirwynlath_

Cap-tain, _penaeth_, _cadben_

Cap-tive, _caeth_, _carcharor_

Cap-ture, _ysbail_, _helfa_: _dal_; _cymmeryd_

Car-bine, _dryll byr_

Car-bon, _ulyf_, _llosged_, _carbon_

Car-cass, _celain_, _ysgerbwd_

Ca-reer, _gyrfa_, _rhedfa_, _helynt_

Care-ful, _gofalus_, _gwyliadwrus_

Care-less, _diofal_, _esgeulus_

Ca-ress, _anwesu_, _llochi_

Ca-ret, _gwallnod_, _diffygnod_

Car-go, _llonglwyth_, _llwyth llong_

Car-nage, _galanastra_, _lladdfa_

Car-nal, _cnawdol_, _anianol_

Ca-rouse, _gloddesta_

Car-pet, _llawrlen_

Car-riage, _clud_, _cerbyd_; _cludiad_

Car-rots, _moron_

Car-ry, _cario_: _arwedd_; _ymddwyn_

Carv-ing, _cerfwaith_; _toriad bwyd_

Cart-wright, _saer troliau_

Cas-cade, _rhaiadr_

Case-ment, _rhwyll_; _colofngap_

Ca-shier, _ceidwad arian_; _talwr_: _diswyddo_

Cast-ing, _tafliad_, _bwriad_

Cas-tle, _castell_

Cas-trate, _dysbaddu_, _cyweirio_

Catch-ing, _heintus_, _adwythig_

Cat-tle, _gwartheg_, _da byw_

Cav-il, _trawsddadl_: _trawsddadleu_

Cau-tion, _pryder_: _rhybuddio_

Cau-tious, _gochelgar_, _gofalus_

Ceil-ing, _nenfwd_; _cronglwyd_

Cel-lar, _diodgell_; _cell_

Ce-ment, _cymmrwd_: _cymmrydu_

Cen-sure, _sen_, _cerydd_: _barnu_, _ceryddu_

Cen-sus, _cofrifiad_, _niferiad_

Cen-tre, _canol_: _canoli_, _cymherfeddu_

Cer-tain, _sicr_, _diau_, _gwir_; _rhyw_, _rhai_

Cha-lice, _cymmun gwpan_

Chal-lenge, _her_, _baidd_, _heriad_: _herio_; _annog_

Cham-ber, _ystafell_

Chand-ler, _canwyllydd_, _canwyllwr_

Chan-nel, _cyfyngfor_; _dyfrlle_: _rhychu_

Cha-os, _tryblith_, _annhrefn cymmysgedd_

Cha-pel, _addoldy_, _capel_

Chap-lain, _caplan_, _capelwr_

Chap-ter, _pennod_

Char-coal, _golosged_, _siarcol_

Charg-er, _cawg_; _march rhyfel_

Charm-ing, _swyngar_; _hyfryd_

Char-ter, _breinlen_, _braint ysgrif_

Chas-tise, _ceryddu_, _cystuddio_

Chat-tel, _da_, _daoedd_; _da symmudol_

Chat-ter, _baldroddi_, _ofersiarad_

Cheer-ful, _llon_, _llawen_

Cher-ry, _ceirios_, _suriain_

Cher-ub, _cerub_, _angel_

Chick-en, _cyw_

Chid-ing, _sen_, _ceryddiad_

Chief-ly, _yn benaf_, _gan mwyaf_

Chief-tain, _blaenor_, _tywysog_

Chil-blain, _malaith_, _llosg eira_

Child-hood, _mebyd_, _mabanoed_

Child-ish, _plentynaidd_

Chil-dren, _plant_

Chil-ly, _rhynllyd_, _oerllyd_

Chim-ney, _simdde_, _simne_

Chin-cough, _y pas_, _sychbeswch_

Chis-el, _cyn_, _gaing_: _cynio_, _geingio_

Chok-ing, _tagfa_

Choos-ing, _dewisiad_, _detholiad_

Chos-en, _etholedig_, _dewisol_

Christ-ian, _cristion_, _credadyn_

Christ-mas, _Nadolig_

Chron-ic, _hen_, _parhaol_

Church-yard, _mynwent_, _claddfa_

Cin-der, _marworyn_, _golosg_

Ci-pher, _goddim_; _gwagnod_: _rhifyddu_, _cyfrif_

Cir-cle, _cylch_, _cant_: _cylchynu_

Cir-cuit, _amgylchedd_: _cylchynu_

Cis-tern, _dyfrgist_

Cit-y, _dinas_, _caer_

Civ-il, _gwledig_; _moesgar_

Cla-mour, _dadwrdd_, _twrf_: _dadyrddu_, _trsystio_

Clas-sic, _uchawdurol_, _prifawdurol_

Clas-sics, _yr uchawduron_, _llenoriaeth Groeg a Rhufain_

Clean-ly, _yn lân_; _yn bur_

Clear-ly, _yn eglur_, _yn oleu_

Clem-ent, _hynaws_, _gwâr_, _addfwyn_

Cler-gy, _offeiriaid_, _gwyr llên_

Clev-er, _hyfedr_, _hylaw_, _medrus_

Cli-ent, _ymgynghorydd_; _nawddyn_

Cli-mate, _hinsawdd_; _parthran_, _bro_

Cli-max, _esgyniaith_, _graddiaith_, _graddeb_

Clip-ping, _tociad_, _amdoriad_; _cnaif_

Close-ly, _yn agos_, _yn gaeth_, _yn fanwl_

Clos-et, _cell_, _cuddigl_, _dirgelfa_

Cloth-ing, _dillad_, _gwisgoedd_

Clot-ty, _tolchog_, _tywarchog_

Cloud-y, _cymmylog_

Clo-ven,  _holltog_,  _holltedig_, _fforchog_

Clown-ish, _trwsgl_, _gwladaidd_

Clum-sy, _trwstan_, _anfedrus_, _carbwl_

Clus-ter, _swp_, _sypyn_: _ymdyru_, _ymsypio_

Coast-er, _orlong_; _glanforwr_

Cob-bler, _clytiwr_, _bongler_

Cob-web, _gwe'r cor_, _corwe_

Co-erce, _attal_, _rhwystro_; _cymhell_

Cof-fin, _arch_: _gosod mewnarch_

Co-gent, _grymus_; _effeithiol_

Co-here, _cydlynu_, _glynu_; _cytuno_

Coin-age, _bathiad_; _arian bath_

Cold-ness, _oerni_; _oerfelgarwch_

Col-lapse, _dadfail_: _adfeilio_

Col-lar, _coler_, _torch_, _gyddfdorch_: _llindagu_

Col-league, _cydswyddog_: _cydswyddo_

Col-lect, _crynodeb_, _colect_: _casglu_, _crynhoi_

Col-lege, _coleg_; _prifysgol_

Co-lon, _gwahannod_, _gorwahanai_

Co-lour, _lliw_: _lliwio_

Co-lours, _llumanau_, _banerau_

Co-lumn, _colofn_, _piler_; _lledwyneb_

Com-bat, _ymryson_, _gwrthwynebu_, _ymladd_

Com-bine, _cyfuno_; _cydgyssylltu_

Come-ly, _gweddus_, _gweddaidd_; _glân_, _teg_

Co-met, _seren gynffonog_, _seren_

Com-fort, _cysur_; _dyddanwch_: _cyssuro_

Com-ing, _dyfodiad_; _dynesiad_

Com-ma, _gwahanai_

Com-mand, _gorchymmyn_: _erchi_, _rheoli_

Com-mence, _dechreu_; _cychwyn_

Com-mend, _canmol_; _cyflwyno_

Com-ment, _eglurhâd_: _egluro_, _esbonio_

Com-merce, _masnach_, _trefnidiaeth_; _masnachu_, _trafnidio_

Com-mit, _gwneuthur_; _gorchymmyn_; _traddodi_; _anfon_

Com-mon, _cyffredin_; _cyffredinol_: _cydfwyta_

Com-mons, _cyffredinwyr_, _is-seneddwyr_; _tir cyffredin_

Com-mune, _ymddyddan_; _cymmuno_

Com-pact, _cryno_, _cynnwys_: _uno_, _cyssylltu_

Com-pare, _cymhariaeth_: _cymharu_, _cyffelybu_

Com-pass, _cylch_, _amgylchedd_; _cwmpas_: _amgylchu_, _cwmpasu_

Com-pel, _cymhell_, _gorfodi_, _gorchfygu_

Com-pete, _cystadlu_, _cydymgeisio_

Com-pile, _casglu_; _cyfansoddi_

Com-plain, _cwyno_, _achwyn_; _grwgnach_

Com-plaint, _cwyn_; _dolur_; _cyhuddiad_

Com-plete, _cyflawn_, _perffaith_: _cyflawni_, _gorphen_, _cwblhau_

Com-plex, _cymhlyg_; _amrywiog_; _dyrys_

Com-ply, _cydsynio_, _ymroddi_, _cytuno_

Com-pose, _cyfansoddi_; _trefnu_; _ysgrifenu_; _llonyddu_

Com-pound, _cyfansawdd_, _cymmysg_: _cymmysgu_; _cyfrandalu_

Com-press, _cydwasg_: _cydwasgu_; _gwasgu_

Com-prise, _cynnwys_; _amgyffred_

Com-pute, _cyfrif_; _bwrw_; _barnu_, _tybio_

Com-rade, _cyfaill_, _cydymaith_; _cydfilwr_

Con-cave, _ceuedd_, _crymgant_; _ceuol_, _argeuol_: _ceuo_, _cyngheuo_

Con-ceal, _cuddio_, _celu_; _gorchuddio_

Con-cede, _caniatâu_; _gadael_; _rhoddi_

Con-ceit, _tyb_, _hunandyb_: _tybio_, _coelio_

Con-ceive, _ymddwyn_, _beichiogi_; _deall_, _amgyffred_, _synied_

Con-cern, _achos_, _neges_, _gorchwyl_; _gofal_

Con-cert, _cyttrefniad_; _cynganedd_: _cyttrefnu_

Con-cise, _byr_, _cryno_; _cynnwysfawr_

Con-clude, _dybenu_, _gorphen_; _penderfynu_

Con-coct, _cydferwi_, _cymmerwi_

Con-cord, _cytundeb_, _cydgordiad_, _cydsain_

Con-course, _tyrfa_, _torf_; _cyrchfa_

Con-crete, _cyfuno_; _casglu_

Con-cur, _cytuno_, _cydsynied_

Con-demn, _collfarnu euogfarnu_; _anghymmeradwyo_

Con-dense, _tew_, _dwys_: _tewhau_

Con-dign, _haeddiannol_, _teilwng_

Con-duct, _ymddygiad_, _buchedd_: _arwain_; _llywio_

Con-duit, _dyfrbibell_; _dyfrlle_

Con-fer, _ymddyddan_; _anrhegu_

Con-fess, _cyffesu_, _cyfaddef_

Con-fide, _hyderu_, _ymddiried_

Con-fine, _cyffin_, _terfyn_: _cyffinio_; _attal_

Con-firm, _cadarnhau_, _sefydlu_

Con-flict, _ymryson_, _amrafael_: _brwydro_

Con-flux, _cydlif_; _cynnulliad_

Con-form, _cydffurfio_; _unffurf_; _tebyg_

Con-found, _cymmysgu_; _dyrysu_

Con-fuse, _cymmysgu_; _annhrefnu_

Con-fute, _dadbrofi_, _gwrthbrofi_

Con-geal, _rhewi_: _tewychu_

Con-gress, _cyssenedd_, _eisteddfod_; _cynnadledd_

Con-join, _cydgyssylltu_, _cydio_

Con-jure, _tyngedu_: _swyno_, _conswrio_

Con-nect, _cyssylltu_; _cydlynu_

Con-nive, _goddef_, _cyd-ddwyn_

Con-quer, _gorchfygu_, _goresgyn_

Con-quest, _buddugoliaeth_, _goruchafiaeth_

Con-science, _cydwybod_; _meddylfryd_

Con-scious, _ymwybodol_, _cydwybodol_

Con-sent, _cydsyniad_: _cydsynio_

Con-sign, _trosglwyddo_, _trosi_; _gorchymmyn_

Con-sist, _cydsefyll_; _cynnwys_; _cytuno_

Con-sole, _ysgwyddyn_: _cysuro_; _lloni_

Con-sort, _cydwedd_, _priod_: _cyfeillachu_; _priodi_

Con-spire, _cydfradu_, _bradlunio_; _cytuno_

Con-stant, _sadrif_; _dianwadal_, _sefydlog_

Con-strain, _cymhell_, _gwasgu_; _treisio_

Con-straint, _cymhelliad_, _gorfodaeth_, _trais_

Con-struct, _adeiladu_, _llunio_, _gwneuthur_

Con-strue, _dehongli_, _esbonio_; _amlygu_

Con-sul, _uchelfaer_, _trafnnoddwr_; _cynghorydd_

Con-sult, _ymgynghori_; _ymofyn â_; _golygu_

Con-sume, _difa_, _treulio_; _gwastraffu_

Con-tact, _cyffyrddiad_: _cyffwrdd_, _cyfarfod_

Con-tain, _cynnwys_; _dal_; _amgyffred_

Con-temn, _dirmygu_, _diystyru_

Con-tempt, _dirmyg_, _diystyrwch_

Con-tend, _ymdrechu_, _ymryson_, _amrafaelio_

Con-tent, _boddlawn_; _hynaws_: _boddloni_

Con-tents, _cynnwysiad_; _cyfanswm_

Con-test, _ymgystadlu_; _gwrthwynebu_

Con-text, _cyttestyn_, _cydwersi_

Con-tract, _ammod_: _ammodi_, _cytuno_

Con-trast, _cyferbyniad_: _cyferbynu_

Con-trite, _briwedig_, _cystuddieddig_; _edifarus_

Con-trive, _dyfeisio_, _dychymmygu_, _llunio_

Con-trol, _rheolaeth_, _awdwrdod_: _rheoli_, _llywio_

Con-tuse, _curo_, _pwyo_, _dryllio_; _yssigo_

Con-vene, _ymgynnull_; _cynnull_, _casglu_

Con-vent, _cyfaint_; _mynachlog_: _gwysio_

Con-verse, _ymddyddan_: _cydymddyddan_, _siared_

Con-vert, _ymchwelwr_; _tröeddig_: _troi_, _cyfnewid_

Con-vex, _crwm_, _cynghrwm_, _crwbi_

Con-vey, _cludo_, _cario_, _trosglwyddo_

Con-vict, _collddyn_, _euog_: _argyhoeddi_; _euogbrofi_

Con-vince, _argyhoeddi_; _darbwyllo_

Con-voke, _cydalw_, _cydwysio_

Con-voy, _canymdo_, _diffynlu_: _nawddlong_

Con-vulse, _dirdynu_, _dirgrynu_

Cool-er, _oeriadur_, _oeriedydd_

Cool-ness, _oerder_; _oerfelgarwch_

Coop-er, _cylchwr_, _cylchlestrwr_

Cop-per, _copr_, _efydd_: _copro_, _efyddu_

Cop-y, _adysgrif_, _llawysgrifen_: _adysgrifenu_

Cord-age, _rhaffau_; _rheffynwaith_

Cor-ner, _cornel_, _congl_, _ongl_

Cor-nice, _taleithwrn_, _taladdurn_

Cor-rect, _cywir_, _difai_: _cywiro_; _ceryddu_

Cor-rode, _cyfysu_, _difa_; _rhydu_

Cor-rupt, _llygredig_: _llygru_, _halogi_

Cor-sair, _morwilliad_, _morleidr_

Cos-tive, _rhwym_, _bolrwym_

Cost-ly, _costus_, _treulfawr_, _drudfawr_

Cos-tume, _dullwisg_; _dullwedd_

Cot-tage, _bwthyn_, _bwth_, _caban_

Cot-ton, _cotwm_; _cotymaidd_: _cotymu_

Coul-ter, _cylltyr_, _cwlltyr_

Coun-cil, _cynghor_; _eisteddfod_

Coun-sel, _cynghor_, _cyfarwyddyd_: _cynghori_

Count-er, _rhifwr_; _yn groes_; _cyferbyniol_

Count-ess, _iarlles_

Coun-try, _gwlad_, _bro_, _ardal_, _tir_

Coun-ty, _rhandir_, _swydd_, _sir_; _rhandirol_

Cou-ple, _par_, _dau_, _cwpwl_: _cyssylltu_; _cyplysu_

Cour-age, _dewrder_, _gwroldeb_

Cours-ing, _hela_, _heliad_

Courte-sy, _ymostyngiad_; _glinblygu_

Cous-in, _cefnder_, _cyfnither_

Cov-er, _clawr_, _cauad_: _toi_, _gorchuddio_

Cov-ert, _cuddfa_, _gwas-godfa_; _cudd_, _dirgel_

Cov-et, _chwennychu_; _cybyddu_

Co-vey, _nythaid_; _haid_

Cow-ard, _anwr_, _cachgi_; _anwraidd_: _digaloni_

Crab-bed, _anfoddog_, _croes_, _sarug_

Cra-dle, _cryd_; _dechreufa_: _siglo cryd_

Crafts-man, _crefftwr_, _celfyddydwr_

Craf-ty, _cyfrwys_, _dichellgar_

Cra-ter, _llosgorel_, _cegfa_, _ceg llosgfal_

Cre-ate, _creu_; _gwneuthur_; _peru_; _urddo_

Crea-ture, _creadur_

Cred-it, _coel_, _cred_: _coelio_, _credu_

Cres-cent, _cilgant_, _hanner lloer_; _cynnyddol_

Crev-ice, _breg_, _agen_, _hollt_: _agenu_, _hollti_

Cri-er, _criwr_; _cyhoeddwr_

Crim-son, _rhudd_, _rhuddgoch_: _rhuddo_, _cochi_

Crip-ple, _cloff_, _efrydd_: _cloffi_, _efryddu_

Cri-sis, _eithafnod_; _argyfwng_

Crit-ic, _beirniad_; _beirniadol_: _beirniadu_

Crotch-et, _crymfach_; _corfanig_

Crown-ing, _coroniad_; _perffeithiad_

Cru-el, _creulawn_, _ffyrnig_, _ysgeler_

Crum-ble, _briwio_, _briwsioni_

Cru-sade, _croessawd_, _rhyfel y groes_

Crys-tal, _crisial_; _crisialaidd_

Cube-root, _trysawdd_; _trysoddiaeth_

Cu-bit, _cufydd_, _cyfelin_

Cuc-koo, _cog_, _y gog_; _cethlydd_

Cud-gel, _pastwn_, _clwpa_: _pastynu_

Cul-prit, _cyhuddog_; _troseddwr_

Cul-ture, _diwylliad_; _gwrteithiad_; _addysg_

Cun-ning, _cyfrwysder_; _cyfrwys_

Cu-rate, _curad_; _offeiriad plwyf_

Cur-rent, _rhediad_, _ffrwd_; _cylchredol_

Cur-tail, _cwtogi_, _byrhau_, _talfyru_

Cur-tain, _croglen_; _cysgodlen_: _croglenu_

Cus-tom, _defod_, _arfer_; _toll_: _cynnefino_

Cut-lass, _anglas_, _crymgleddyf_, _bidog_

Cut-ler, _cyllellwr_; _gof cyllyll_

Cut-ter, _torwr_; _ysgafnlong_

Cy-cle, _cylch_, _chwyl_; _cylchred_

Cyg-net, _alarchen_, _cyw alarch_

Cy-press, _ffyllwydd_, _cypreswydd_

Dai-ly, _beunyddiol_, _beunydd_; _o ddydd i ddydd_

Dain-ty, _danteithfwyd_; _moethus_

Dai-ry, _llaethdy_; _hafotty_

Dai-sy, _llygad y dydd_, _swynfri_

Dam-age, _niwed_, _colled_; _cost_: _niweidio_, _drygu_

Dam-sel, _llangces_; _herlodes_, _hogen_

Dan-ger, _perygl_: _peryglu_

Dar-ing, _beiddiad_, _hyf_, _anturiol_

Dark-en, _tywyllu_, _duo_, _cymmylu_

Dark-ness, _tywyllwch_; _cysgod_; _niwl_

Da-tive, _rhoddiadol_, _rhoddedigol_

Daugh-ter, _merch_; _llangces_

Daunt-ed, _synedig_, _ofnus_

Daunt-less, _calonog_, _hyf_, _diarswyd_

Day-book, _dyddlyfr_

Day-break, _gwawr_

Day-light, _goleuni dydd_; _dyddwawl_

Daz-zle, _serenu_, _pelydru_, _dallu_

Dea-con, _gwas_, _gwasanaethwr_; _diacon_

Dead-ly, _marwol_, _angeuol_; _yn farwol_

Deaf-ness, _byddarwch_, _byddardod_

Deal-ing, _masnach_, _trafnid_; _negeswriaeth_

De-bar, _attal_, _rhwystro_; _gwahardd_

De-base, _iselu_, _iselhau_, _gwaethygu_

De-bate, _dadl_; _ymresymiad_: _dadlu_

De-bauch, _llygru_, _halogi_, _gloddesta_

Deb-it, _dyled_: _dyledu_

Debt-or, _dyledwr_; _dyledog_

De-camp, _dadwersyllu_; _cilio_, _ffoi_

De-cay, _dadfail_; _gwendid_: _dadfeilio_; _gwanhau_

De-cease, _marwolaeth_, _ymadawiad_: _marw_

De-ceit, _twyll_, _hoced_, _ffalsedd_, _dichell_

De-ceive, _twyllo_, _hudo_, _siomi_

De-cent, _gweddaidd_, _addwyn_, _prydferth_

De-cide, _penderfynu_, _dybenu_

De-clare, _mynegi_, _hysbysu_, _cyhoeddi_

De-cline, _darfodedigaeth_: _gogwyddo_; _adfeilio_

De-coy, _hud_; _deniad_: _hudo_; _twyllo_

De-crease, _lleihâd_; _byrhâd_: _lleihau_, _treio_

De-cree, _gorchymmyn_, _deddf_: _barnu_; _deddfu_

De-cry, _goganu_, _difrio_, _cablu_

De-duce, _erthynu_, _tynu_, _casglu_

De-duct, _tynu o_; _tynu ymaith_; _erthynu_

De-face, _anffurfio_, _anharddu_; _llygru_

De-fame, _enllibio_, _athrodi_, _absennu_

De-fault, _diffyg_, _pall_: _diffygio_, _pallu_

De-feat, _dadymchweliad_: _dymchwelyd_; _trechu_

De-fect, _diffyg_, _gwall_, _eisiau_

De-fence, _amddiffyn_; _nawdd_; _gwrthwynebiad_

De-fend, _amddiffyn_, _diogelu_; _gwahardd_

De-fer, _oedi_, _gohirio_; _cyfeirio_

De-file, _trawien_, _culffordd_: _halogi_, _llygru_

De-fine, _dosbenu_, _darlunio_, _amlygu_

De-form, _anffurfio_, _aflunio_, _hacru_

De-fraud, _twyllo_, _hocedu_; _siomi_

De-fray, _talu_, _dwyn cost_, _digostio_

De-fy, _herio_, _beiddio_; _dirmygu_

De-grade, _diraddio_, _diswyddo_; _iselu_

De-gree, _gradd_, _urdd_; _mesur_

De-ist, _duwiad_; _anffyddiwr_

De-ject, _prudd_, _digalon_: _gostwng_, _iselu_

De-lay, _oed_, _aros_, _arosiad_: _oedi_, _gohirio_

De-light, _hyfrydwch_: _difyru_; _boddloni_

De-lude, _twyllo_, _hudo_, _siomi_

Del-uge, _dylif_, _diluw_: _dylifo_, _gorllifo_

De-mand, _gofyniad_; _galwad_: _gofyn_, _holi_; _mynu_

De-mean, _ymddwyn_, _ymarweddu_

De-mesne, _maenor_; _tiriogaeth_, _treftadaeth_

De-mise, _gosodiad_; _marwolaeth_: _trosi_; _ewyllysio_, _cymmynroddi_

De-mon, _cythraul_; _ellyll_

De-mur, _oed_, _gohiriad_: _oedi_, _gohirio_, _ammeu_

De-note, _dynodi_, _nodi_; _arwyddocäu_

De-nounce, _cyhoeddi_, _mynegi_; _hysbysu_

Dent-al, _deintiol_, _danneddol_

De-ny, _gwadu_; _nacäu_; _gomedd_

De-part, _ymadael_, _cilio_: _marw_

De-pend, _dibynu_, _ymddibynu_; _ymddiried_

De-pict, _darlunio_, _delweddu_

De-plore, _cwyno_, _galaru_; _gresynu wrth_

De-port, _arwedd_, _agweddu_; _trosglwyddo_

De-pose, _diswyddo_; _tystio_; _tystio ar lw_

De-pot, _ystorfa_, _ystordy_; _cadystorfa_

De-prave, _llygru_, _halogi_, _aflanhau_

De-press, _gostwng_, _iselu_; _gwasgu_; _tlodi_

De-prive, _difuddio_, _amddifadu_; _ysbeilio_

De-pute, _dirprwyo_, _cenadu_; _anfon_

De-range, _annhrefnu_, _dyrysu_

De-ride, _gwatwar_; _dirmygu_

De-rive, _tarddu_, _deillio_; _dyfod_

Des-ert, _anialwch_, _diffeithwch_

De-scend, _disgyn_; _gostwng_; _hanu_, _tarddu_

De-scent, _disgyniad_; _disgynfa_; _tarddiad_

De-scribe, _darlunio_; _amlygu_; _ysgrifenu_

De-scry, _canfyddiad_: _canfod_; _chwilio_; _amlygu_

Des-ert, _haeddiant_: _gadael_; _cilio_

De-serve, _haeddu_, _teilyngu_; _ennill_

De-sign, _bwriad_; _dyfais_: _bwriadu_, _amcanu_

De-sire, _dymuniad_, _awydd_: _dymuno_; _deisyf_

De-sist, _peidio_, _ymattal_; _aros_, _sefyll_

De-spair, _anobaith_: _anobeithio_

De-spatch, _brys_; _bryslythr_: _brysio_; _cyflawni_

De-spise, _dirmygu_, _diystyru_

De-spite, _mig_, _malais_: _blino_, _sarhau_

De-spoil, _ysbeilio_; _difrodi_; _lladrata_

De-spond, _anobaith_: _anobeithio_

Des-pot, _gormesdeyrn_; _brenin_

Des-tine, _arfaethu_; _darparu_; _dedfrydu_

De-stroy, _dystrywio_; _difrodi_; _lladd_

De-tach, _dydoli_, _neillduo_; _rhyddhau_

De-tail, _manwl adrodd_; _neillduoli_

De-tails, _manylion_, _neillduolion_

De-tain, _attalgwyn_: _attal_, _rhwystro_

De-tect, _dadguddio_; _canfod_; _cyhuddo_

De-ter, _rhwystro_, _attal_; _digaloni_

De-test, _ffieiddio_, _casäu_; _dirmygu_

De-throne, _diorseddu_, _dadorseddu_

De-vice, _dyfais_, _dychymmyg_

De-vise, _cymmyn_, _ewyllys_: _dyfeisio_; _cymmynu_

De-void, _gwag_; _amddifad_; _rhydd_

De-volve, _disgyn_; _treiglo_; _dygwydd_

De-vote, _cyflwyno_, _cyssegru_

De-vour, _difa_, _difrodi_, _gwastraffu_

De-vout, _duwiol_, _crefyddol_

Di-al, _orfynag_, _heulfynag_, _deial_

Dic-tate, _gorchymmyn_, _archiad_: _erchi_, _addysgu_

Di-et, _ymborth_, _lluniaeth_: _ymborthi_

Dif-fer, _gwahaniaethu_; _anghytuno_

Dif-fuse, _taenu_, _gwasgaru_; _chwyddo_

Di-gest, _rheithlyfr_: _trefnu_, _cyfansoddi_; _treulio_

Dig-ger, _cloddiwr_, _palwr_, _ceibiwr_

Dig-it, _bysfed_, _lled bys_; _unigrif_

Di-gress, _crwydro_, _gwyro_, _osgoi_

Di-late, _lledu_, _helaethu_; _taenu_

Di-lute, _teneu_: _teneuo_, _cymmysgu â dwr_

Dim-ly, _yn dywyll_; _yn bwl_

Din-ner, _ciniaw_, _prydnhawnbryd_

Diph-thong, _deuseiniad_, _dwysain_

Di-rect, _cyfeirnod_; _cyfeiriol_: _cyfeirio_

Dire-ful, _erchyll_, _dychrynllyd_; _ffyrnig_

Dirt-y, _budr_, _brwnt_: _diwyno_, _budro_

Dis-arm, _diarfogi_; _darostwng_

Dis-band, _dadfyddino_; _gwasgaru_

Dis-burse, _treulio_, _gwario_; _talu allan_

Dis-cern, _canfod_, _dirnad_, _deall_

Dis-charge, _dadlwythiad_; _rhediad_; _agorfa_: _dadlwytho_; _gollwng_,
_rhyddhau_

Dis-claim, _diarddel_; _gwadu_; _dihawlio_

Dis-close, _dadgudd_: _dadguddio_, _amlygu_

Dis-cord, _anghydfod_, _amrafael_

Dis-count, _toliant_: _toll_, _dattynu_

Dis-course, _ymadrodd_, _araeth_: _ymadroddi_, _cydsiarad_, _llefaru_

Dis-creet, _call_, _synwyrol_; _cynnil_

Dis-cuss, _holi_; _rhesymu_; _amlygu_

Dis-dain, _dirmyg_: _dirmygu_; _ffieiddio_

Dis-ease, _clefyd_, _afiechyd_: _anhwylio_, _poeni_

Dis-grace, _gwarth_, _gwaradwydd_: _gwarthruddo_

Dis-guise, _lledrith_, _rhagrith_: _lledrithio_, _ffugio_

Dis-gust, _gwrthflas_; _ffieiddrwydd_: _diflasu_; _ffieiddio_; _digio_

Dis-joint, _dadgymmalu_; _gwahanu_

Dis-like, _anhoffder_: _casineb_: _anhoffi_; _casäu_

Dis-lodge, _dilochesu_; _symmud_, _mudo_

Dis-mal, _erchyll_, _galarus_; _ofnadwy_

Dis-may, _dychrynu_, _llyfrhau_

Dis-miss, _gollwng_, _rhyddhau_; _diswyddo_

Dis-mount, _disgyn_; _dadymchwelyd_

Dis-own, _gwadu_, _diarddelwi_; _dihawlu_

Dis-pel, _gwasgaru_, _taenu_; _gyru ar ffo_

Dis-pense, _cyfranu_, _dosbarthu_; _hebgor_

Dis-perse, _gwasgaru_, _chwalu_; _dosbarthu_

Dis-place, _dilëu_, _symmud_; _diswyddo_

Dis-play, _arddangosiad_: _arddangos_; _darlunio_

Dis-please, _anfoddio_; _tramgwyddo_; _casäu_

Dis-pose, _trefnu_, _dosbarthu_; _tueddu_; _gwerthu_

Dis-pute, _dadl_: _dadleu_; _gwrthwynebu_

Dis-sent, _anghytundeb_, _neillduaeth_: _anghytuno_; _ymneillduo_

Dis-solve, _toddi_, _dadmer_, _dadgorffori_

Dis-taff, _cogel_, _cogail_

Dis-tance, _pellder_, _meithdra_: _pelläu_

Dis-tant, _pell_, _pellenig_; _oeraidd_

Dis-tend, _helaethu_, _estyn_; _mwyhau_

Dis-til, _dystyllio_, _defnynu_; _toddi_

Dis-tinct, _gwahanol_, _neillduedig_; _eglur_

Dis-tract, _croesdynu_; _poeni_; _gwallgofi_

Dis-train, _gafaelu_, _attafaelu_; _codi da_

Dis-traint, _gafaeliad_, _attafaeliad_

Dis-tress, _cyfyngder_, _ing_: _cyfyngu_, _cystuddio_

Dis-trict, _cylchdaith_; _tiriogaeth_, _ardal_

Dis-trust, _anymddiried_: _anhyderu_

Dis-turb, _aflonyddu_, _blino_

Dis-use, _anarfer_: _anarferu_

Dit-to, _yr un_, _yr un peth_; _eto_

Di-verge, _ymwasgaru_, _lledwyro_

Di-vers, _amryw_, _llawer_, _aml_

Di-verse, _amrywiol_; _gwahanol_; _amgen_

Di-vert, _difyru_, _boddhau_; _gwyro_

Di-vest, _dihatru_, _diosg_; _difuddio_

Di-vide, _rhanu_, _cyfranu_; _ysgar_, _ymagor_

Di-vine, _duwinydd_; _dwyfol_: _dewinio_; _dyfalu_

Di-vorce, _ysgariaeth_: _ysgaru_; _dadbriodi_

Di-vulge, _cyhoeddi_; _dadguddio_, _amlygu_

Diz-zy, _syfrdan_, _penchwiban_

Do-cile, _hyddysg_; _dof_, _hynaws_

Doc-tor, _doethor_, _dysgawdwr_: _meddyg_: _meddygu_; _doctora_

Doc-trine, _athrawiaeth_; _dysgeidiaeth_

Do-er, _gwneuthurwr_, _gweithredydd_

Do-ing, _gweithred_: _yn gwneuthur_

Dole-ful, _tristlawn_, _galarus_

Do-main, _tiriogaeth_; _etifeddiaeth_

Do-nor, _rhoddwr_, _rhoddiad_

Dor-mant, _swmer_; _cysgadwr_; _cysgedig_

Dor-mouse, _pathew_, _marwgwsg_

Dou-ble, _plyg_; _dyblyg_; _yn ddeublyg_: _plygu_

Doub-ling, _dyblygiad_; _ymdro_

Doubt-ful, _amhëus_; _ansafadwy_

Down-fall, _cwymp_, _codwm_; _dinystr_

Do-zen, _deuddeg_, _dwsin_

Drafts-man, _tyniedydd_, _darluniwr_

Dra-gon, _draig_; _dragon_

Dra-goon, _marchfilwr_: _gormesu_

Drain-age, _dyhysbyddiaeth_

Dra-per, _golofydd_; _brethynwr_; _llieiniwr_

Draw-er, _tynwr_; _lluniedydd_; _llogell_

Draw-ing, _tyniad_, _llusgiad_; _darluniad_

Dread-ful, _ofnadwy_, _erchyll_, _arswydlawn_

Dro-ver, _porthmon_; _gyrwr_

Drow-sy, _cysglyd_, _swrth_; _diog_

Dru-id, _derwydd_

Drum-mer, _tabyrddwr_, _rhuglenwr_

Drunk-ard, _meddwyn_, _diotwr_

Dry-ing, _sychiad_, _crasiad_; _sychol_

Dry-ness, _sychder_; _crinder_

Duck-ling, _hwyaden_, _cyw hwyad_

Duc-tile, _hydyn_, _ystwyth_; _estynadwy_

Du-el, _ornest_; _ymryson_: _ymladd ornest_

Duke-dom, _dugiaeth_, _duciaeth_

Dull-ness, _hurtrwydd_; _pylni_; _tywyllni_

Du-ly, _yn ddyladwy_; _yn addas_; _yn brydlawn_

Dun-geon, _daiardy_; _dyfngell_: _carchargellu_

Dung-hill, _tomen_, _teilfa_; _tomenaidd_

Du-ring, _yn parhau_; _parhäus_; _hyd tra_

Dust-y, _llychlyd_, _llychwin_

Dutch-ess, _duges_

Du-ty, _dyledswydd_; _swydd_; _toll_, _treth_

Dwell-ing, _preswylfod_; _ty annedd_: _yn preswylio_

Dwin-dle, _dihoeni_, _diflanu_; _gwanychu_

Dy-er, _lliwydd_, _lliwiwr_, _llifwr_

Dye-ing, _lliwiad_; _lliwyddiaeth_

Ea-ger, _taer_, _awyddus_, _gwangcus_

Ea-gle, _eryr_

Earl-dom, _iarllaeth_

Ear-ly, _cynnar_; _boreuol_; _yn gynnar_; _bore_

Earn-est, _difrifoldeb_; _difrif_, _diwyd_; _taer_

Earn-ing, _ennill_, _cyflog_; _ennilliad_

Ear-ring, _clustlws_, _clustfodrwy_

Earth-en, _priddin_, _pridd_, _priddol_

Earth-ly, _daiarol_: _bydol_; _gwael_

Earth-quake, _daiargryn_, _daiargryd_

Earth-worm, _amwydyn_, _abwydyn_

Ear-wig, _pryf clust_, _clustchwilen_

Ea-sel, _attegydd_, _attegyr_

East-er, _Pasc_; _gwyl y Pasc_

East-ern, _dwyreiniol_; _tua'r dwyrain_

East-ward, _yn ddwyreiniol_

Eas-y, _hawdd_, _esmwyth_, _rhwydd_

Ech-o, _adsain_, _ateblais_: _adseinio_

E-clipse, _diffyg_; _arguddiad_: _cymmylu_; _arguddio_

Ed-dy, _trobwll_; _adlif_: _dystroi_; _cylchdroi_

E-dict, _rheitharch_, _teyrnarch_, _cyhoeddiad_

Ef-face, _dilëu_, _anffurfio_, _dinystrio_; _tywyllu_

Ef-fect, _effaith_; _dyben_: _effeithio_; _dichon_

Ef-fects, _da_, _daodd_, _moddion_; _nwyddau_

Ef-fort, _ymdrech_, _ymgais_, _egni_

E-gress, _mynedfa_, _mynediad allan_

Ei-ther, _un ór ddau_; _y ddau_; _naill ai_

E-ject, _taflu allan_; _difeddiannu_

E-lapse, _llithro_, _myned heibio_; _darfod_

E-late, _dyrchafedig_, _derchafedig_: _dyrchafu_

El-bow, _elin_, _penelin_: _penlino_

Eld-er, _hyn_, _hynach_; _hynaf_

Eld-er, _henuriad_, _hynafgwr_; _ysgaw_

Eld-est, _hynaf_, _cyntafanedig_

E-lect, _etholedig_: _ethol_, _dewis_

E-lope, _cilio_, _encilio_; _diangc_

Else-where, _mewn lle arall_; _mewn manau ereill_

E-lude, _diangc_, _diengyd_; _siomi_

Em-balm, _perarogli_; _cyweirio corff marw_

Em-bark, _llongi_, _morio_; _cychwyn_

Em-bers, _marwor_, _ulw_, _eirias_

Em-blem, _arwyddlun_: _arwyddlunio_

Em-brace, _cofleidiad_: _cofleidio_

E-merge, _dadymsuddo_; _deilliaw o_

E-mit, _bwrw allan_; _saethu_; _pelydru_

Em-met, _morgrugyn_, _mywionyn_

Em-pale, _amgau_, _argau_; _pawlwanu_

Em-pire, _amherodraeth_; _teyrnas_

Em-ploy, _gorchwyl_: _gorchwylu_; _rhoi ar waith_

Em-press, _amherodres_, _ymherodres_

Emp-ty, _gwag_; _heb ddim_: _gwaghau_; _tywallt_

En-act, _deddfu_; _gosod_, _trefnu_

En-camp, _gwersyllu_; _ymfyddino_

En-chant, _swyno_, _dewinio_; _hudo_

En-close, _amgau_, _amgylchu_; _goblygu_

En-croach, _cyfyngu_, _gormesu_; _rhuthro_

En-dear, _anwylo_, _anwylhau_

End-ing, _diweddiad_, _terfyniad_

End-less, _diddiwedd_, _diderfyn_, _diddarfod_

En-dorse, _cefnysgrifo_; _cymmeradwyo_

En-dow, _gwaddoli_, _cynnysgaeddu_; _addurno_

En-due, _cynnysgaeddu_; _gwisgo_; _rhoddi_

En-dure, _parhau_; _goddef_, _dioddef_

En-force, _grymuso_, _cadarnhau_; _treisio_

En-gage, _rhwymo_; _ennill_; _cytuno â_

En-graft, _impio_, _bywyllu_

En-grave, _cerfio_, _argraffu_

En-gross, _rhagbrynu_; _brasysgrifenu_

En-hance, _cyfodi_; _mwyhau_; _cynnyddu_

En-join, _gorchymmyn_; _cyfarwyddo_

En-joy, _mwynhau_; _perchenogi_

En-large, _helaethu_, _chwanegu_; _rhyddhau_

En-list, _rhestru_; _rhestru yn filwr_

E-nough, _digon_; _yn ddigonol_

En-quire, _gofyn_, _holi_; _ymgynghori_

En-rage, _llidio_, _cyffroi_; _ffyrnigo_

En-rich, _cyfoethogi_; _ffrwythloni_

En-rol, _coflyfru_, _cofrestru_

En-sign, _baner_, _lluman_; _banerwr_

En-slave, _caethiwo_; _difreinio_

En-snare, _maglu_, _rhwydo_

En-sue, _canlyn_, _dilyn_

En-sure, _diogelu_, _yswirio_

En-tail, _rhwymddisgyniad_: _hawlrwymo_

En-ter, _myned i mewn_; _dechreu_; _llyfru_

En-throne, _gorseddu_, _gorseddfeingcio_

En-tice, _hudo_, _denu_; _twyllo_

En-tire, _cyfan_, _cwbl_; _perffaith_

En-trails, _coluddion_; _rhanau mewnol_

En-trance, _mynediad_; _cychwynfa_

En-trap, _maglu_, _rhwydo_; _twyllo_

En-treat, _atolwg_, _atolygu_, _erfyn_

En-try, _cyntedd_, _dyfodfa_; _coflyfriad_

En-voy, _llysnegesydd_, _negeswr_, _cenad_

En-vy, _cenfigen_, _casineb_: _cenfigenu_

E-poch, _prifnod_, _prifnod amser_

E-qual, _cydradd_; _cyfartal_: _cyfartalu_

E-quip, _taclu_, _arfogi_; _gwisgo_

E-ra, _prifnod_, _amser gyff_

E-rase, _dilëu_: _crafu ymaith_

E-rect, _unionsyth_; _uniawn_: _cyfodi_; _adeiladu_

Er-rand, _neges_, _cenadwri_; _gorchwyl_

Er-ror, _cyfeiliornad_; _gwall_; _camwedd_

E-scape, _diangfa_; _ymryddhâd_: _diangc_, _ffoi_

Es-cort, _canymdo_, _nawddlu_: _gosgorddi_

E-spouse, _dyweddio_; _amddiffyn_

Es-quire, _yswain_: _cludydd arfau_

Es-say, _prawf_; _traethawd_: _profi_; _anturio_

Es-sence, _sylwedd_; _anian_: _arogli_

Es-tate, _cyflwr_, _ansawdd_; _etifeddiaeth_: _sefydlu_

Es-teem, _cyfrif_, _parch_: _ystyried_, _anrhydeddu_

Etch-ing, _ysgerfiad_, _crafluniad_

E-ther, _nyfel_, _uchawyr_; _nyfelwy_

Eth-ics, _moesddysg_, _moesoni_

E-vade, _gochel_, _diangc_

E-ven, _hwyr_; _gwastad_, _llyfn_; _cyfartal_: _gwastatäu_; _cyfartalu_;
_nid amgen_

E-vent, _dygwydd_, _dygwyddiad_; _canlyniad_

Ev-er, _byth_, _yn dragywydd_, _bob amser_

E-vil, _drwg_, _aflwydd_; _drygionus_; _yn ddrwg_

E-vince, _arddangos_, _profi_; _amlygu_

E-volve, _dadblygu_, _agor_, _ymagor_

Ew-er, _dyfrlestr_; _ystên_; _crothogen_

Ex-act, _manwl_, _cywir_: _mynu_; _gofyn_

Ex-alt, _dyrchafu_, _codi_; _mawrhau_

Ex-ceed, _rhagori_, _blaenori_; _myned dros_

Ex-cel, _rhagori_, _blaenori_, _amgenu ar_

Ex-cept, _ond_, _eithr_, _onid_; _oni byddai_: _eithro_, _gwrthod_; _cau
allan_

Ex-cess, _gormodedd_, _gormod_; _anghymmedroldeb_

Ex-change, _newid_, _cyfnewid_: _newid_, _ffeirio_

Ex-cise, _cyllid_, _toll_: _cyllido_; _trethu_

Ex-cite, _cyffroi_, _cynhyrfu_, _annog_

Ex-claim, _gwaedd_, _bloedd_: _gwaeddi_, _bloeddio_

Ex-clude, _cau allan_; _llysu_; _gwahardd_

Ex-cuse, _esgus_: _esgusodi_; _maddeu_

Ex-empt, _rhydd_; _esgusodol_: _rhyddhau_; _esgusodi_

Ex-ert, _egnïo_, _ymdrechu_; _arfer_

Ex-hale, _tarthu_; _anadlu allan_; _anadlu_

Ex-hort, _annog_, _cynghori_; _rhybuddio_

Ex-haust, _dyhysbyddu_; _blino_

Ex-ile, _alldudiaeth_; _alldud_: _alldudio_, _deol_

Ex-ist, _bod_, _hanfod_; _byw_; _aros_

Ex-it, _ymadawiad_, _mynediad allan_; _terfyn_

Ex-pand, _lledu_, _taenu_; _agor_

Ex-panse, _eangder_; _ymlediad_

Ex-pect, _dysgwyl_; _aros_; _gobeithio_

Ex-pel, _bwrw allan_; _ymlid ymaith_

Ex-pend, _treulio_, _gwario_, _costio_

Ex-pense, _traul_, _cost_; _treuliad_

Ex-pert, _hyfedrydd_; _cyfarwydd_, _cywraint_

Ex-pire, _anadlu allan_; _trengu_, _marw_

Ex-plain, _egluro_, _amlygu_; _dangos_

Ex-plode, _ffrwydro_; _difrio_; _cablu_

Ex-ploit, _gorchest_, _camp_; _gwrolwaith_

Ex-plore, _fforio_; _chwilio_; _profi_

Ex-port, _allforiad_, _trawglud_

Ex-pose, _eglurhâd_: _dynoethi_; _dangos_

Ex-pound, _egluro_, _esbonio_; _dirnad_

Ex-press, _brysgenad_, _cenadwri_; _eglur_, _amlwg_: _mynegi_, _traethu_

Ex-tant, _yn bod_; _hanfodol_

Ex-tend, _estyn_; _hwyhau_; _helaethu_

Ex-tent, _helaethrwydd_; _hyd_; _estyn_

Ex-tinct, _diffoddedig_: _diffoddi_; _difa_

Ex-tol, _dyrchafu_, _mawrygu_

Ex-tort, _gwasgu_, _gorthrymu_; _mynu_

Ex-tra, _tra_, _rhy_, _tros ben_

Ex-tract, _erthynawd_; _crynodeb_; _tynu_; _gwasgu allan_; _crynhoi_

Ex-treme, _eithaf_; _pellder_; _diweddaf_; _dirfawr_

Ex-ult, _ymddychlamu_; _llawenhau_

Eye-ball, _canwyll llygad_, _mablygad_

Eye-brow, _ael_, _ael y llygad_

Eye-lash, _geilflew_, _amrantflew_

Eye-lid, _amrant_, _amrant llygaid_

Eye-sight, _golwg_; _llygaid_: _gweled_

Fa-ble, _chwedl_, _dychymmyg_: _ffugio_

Fab-ric, _adail_, _adeilad_: _adeiladu_

Fac-ile, _hawdd_, _rhwydd_; _hynaws_

Fac-ing, _gwynebiad_: _yn gwynebu_

Fac-tor, _gorchwylydd_, _rhagfaelydd_

Fag-ot, _ffagod_, _ffagoden_: _ffagodi_

Faint-ing, _llewygiad_; _llewyg_

Fair-ly, _yn deg_

Fair-y, _ellyll_, _gwyll_; _tylwyth teg_

Faith-ful, _ffyddlawn_; _diwair_; _cywir_

Fal-con, _hebog_, _gwalch_

Fall-en, _syrthiedig_, _cwympedig_

Fall-ing, _syrthiad_: _yn syrthio_

Fal-low, _braenar_: _braenaru_

False-hood, _geudeb_, _ffalsedd_, _anwiredd_

Fal-ter, _cecian_; _attal dywedyd_; _bloesgi_

Fam-ine, _newyn_; _diffyg ymborth_

Fam-ish, _newynu_; _marw o newyn_

Fa-mous, _enwog_, _clodfawr_, _canmoladwy_

Fan-cy, _dychymmyg_; _mympwy_; _hoffedd_: _dychymmygu_, _ffansio_; _serchu_

Fan-light, _awffenestr_, _ffenestr wyntyll_

Fare-well, _ymadawiad_; _bydd wych_; _ffarwel_

Farm-er, _amaethydd_, _ffarmwr_, _llafurwr_

Far-row, _perchyll_, _torllwyth_: _porchellu_

Far-ther, _pellach_; _ym mhellach_

Far-thest, _pellaf_, _eithaf_; _yn bellaf_

Far-thing, _ffyrling_, _flyrlling_

Fash-ion, _dull_, _gwedd_: _llunio_, _ffurfio_

Fast-en, _sicrhau_; _diogelu_; _cyssylltu_

Fast-ing, _ymprydiad_: _yn ymprydio_

Fast-ness, _sicrwydd_, _diogelwch_, _amddiffynfa_

Fa-tal, _angeuol_; _tyngedfenol_

Fa-ther, _tad_; _tadws_: _tadu_, _tadogi_

Fath-om, _gwrhyd_, _chwech trodfedd_: _gwrhydu_

Fa-tigue, _blinder_, _lludded_: _blino_, _lluddedu_

Fat-ling, _llwdn pesgedig_; _pasgedig_

Fat-ness, _brasder_, _tewder_; _ffrwythlondeb_

Fat-ten, _tewhau_, _tewychu_, _brasäu_

Fa-vour, _hoffedd_, _caredigrwydd_: _hoffi_, _parchu_, _cynnorthwyo_

Fear-ful, _ofnog_, _brawychus_; _ofnadwy_

Feast-ing, _gwleddiad_; _cyfeddach_, _gwledd_

Feath-er, _pluen_; _addurn_: _pluo_; _addurno_

Fea-ture, _prydwedd_, _pryd_: _prydweddu_

Fee-ble, _gwan_, _egwan_, _dinerth_

Feel-ing, _teimlad_; _syniad_; _teimladwy_

Fel-low, _cydymaith_, _cyfaill_: _cyfeillio_; _cyplu_

Fel-on, _cyflafanwr_, _drygweithredwr_; _creulawn_

Fe-male, _benyw_, _merch_; _benywaidd_

Fen-der, _rhagodydd_, _aelwydor_; _ffender_

Fen-ny, _corsol_, _corsog_, _corslyd_

Fer-ment, _ymwaith_; _heples_: _ymweithio_, _eplesu_

Fer-rel, _amdorch_: _amdorchi_

Fer-ry, _ceubalfa_, _porthfa_: _trosglwyddo_, _trosi_

Fer-tile, _ffrwythlawn_; _toreithiog_

Fer-vent, _gwresog_; _taer_; _eiddgar_

Fer-vid, _gwresog_, _poeth_; _brwdfrydig_

Fer-vour, _gwres_

Fes-ter, _crawni_, _madru_, _braenu_

Fes-tive, _gwleddol_

Fet-ter, _llyffethar_: _llyffetheirio_

Feu-dal, _gwriogaethol_; _cydweiniol_

Fe-ver, _twymyn_, _llucheden_: _twymyno_

Few-el, _tanwydd_: _tanboethi_, _porthi tân_

Fi-at, _gorchymmyn_, _arch_

Fi-bre, _llinionen_, _edef_; _meinwreiddyn_

Fi-brous, _llinaidd_, _meinwreiddiog_

Fic-tion, _ffugiant_, _ffugwaith_; _ffalsedd_

Fierce-ness, _ffrynigrwydd_; _digofaint_

Fight-ing, _ymladdiad_; _ymladdgar_

Fig-ure, _llun_, _dull_, _ffurf_, _delw_, _arwyddlun_: _llunio_, _ffarfio_;
_rhwysgo_

Fil-ial, _mabaidd_, _mabol_; _plentynol_

Fil-let, _ysnoden_, _rhwymyn_: _ysnodenu_; _rhwymo_; _cylchu_

Fil-ly, _eboles_, _ffilog_

Fil-ter, _hidl_; _puredydd_: _hidlo_; _puro_

Filth-y, _budr_, _brwnt_, _ffiaidd_, _aflan_

Fi-nal, _diweddaf_, _penderfynol_; _llwyr_

Fi-nance, _daered_, _cyllid y deyrnas_; _trethyddiaith_

Fine-ness, _tegwch_; _meinder_; _cywreinrwydd_

Fin-ish, _gorphen_, _terfyn_: _dybenu_, _diweddu_

Fin-ger, _bys_: _bysio_, _teimlo_

Fin-ny, _adeiniog_, _asgellog_, _pysgadeiniog_

Fi-nite, _terfynol_, _meidrol_; _mesurol_

Fire-arms, _arfau tân_; _cyflegrau_, _gynau_

Fire-damp, _tanchwa_, _tanfa_

Fire-side, _aelwyd_; _pentan_; _teulu_

Firm-ness, _cadernid_, _ffyrfder_, _sefydlogrwydd_

First-born, _cyntafanedig_, _hynaf_

First-fruit, _blaenffrwyth_, _cynffrwyth_

Fish-er, _pysgotwr_

Fish-ing, _pysgota_

Fish-pond, _pysgodlyn_

Fis-sure, _hollt_, _agen_: _hollti_, _agenu_

Fit-ter, _addaswr_, _cyfaddasydd_, _ffitiwr_

Fix-ture, _sefydliad_; _sadrwydd_

Fix-tures, _anysgogion_, _dodrefn arosol_

Flab-by, _llibin_; _masw_, _meddal_

Flac-cid, _llipa_, _gwywllyd_, _nychlyd_

Fla-grant, _llosg_, _poeth_, _gwresog_

Flan-nel, _gwlanen_

Flat-ter, _gwastadydd_: _gwenieithio_

Fla-vour, _archwaeth_: _archwaethu_

Flesh-ly, _cnawdol_: _bydol_; _anianol_

Flesh-meat, _cigfwyd_, _cig_

Float-ing, _nofiad_: _nofiedig_, _yn nofio_

Flog-ging, _ffrwylliad_

Flood-gate, _llifddor_, _dyfrddor_, _argae_

Flor-id, _blodeuog_; _claerwych_; _gwridog_

Flor-ist, _blodeuwr_, _blodameuthydd_

Floun-der, _llythïen_, _lleden_: _ystreigled_; _ymsoddi_

Flour-ish, _blodau_; _addurn_: _blodeuo_; _llwyddo_

Flow-er, _blodeuyn_; _addurnwaith_: _blodeuo_

Flow-ing, _llifiad_, _ffrydiad_; _llifol_, _ffrydiol_

Flu-ent, _ffrwd_; _darlifran_; _ffrydiol_; _hyawdl_

Flu-id, _aw_, _gwy_, _gwlybwr_; _hylifol_, _rhedegog_

Flut-ter, _ysgydwad_: _ymhedfan_

Fly-ing, _ehediad_; _ffoad_

Foam-ing, _ewynawg_

Fo-cus, _cynnullfan pelydr_; _ffoc_

Fod-der, _porthiant_: _porthi_

Fog-gy, _niwliog_; _godywyll_

Fold-ing, _plygiad_

Fol-low, _dilyn_, _canlyn_; _erlid_

Fol-ly, _ynfydrwydd_, _ffoledd_

Fo-ment, _cynhesu_; _twymeneinio_

Fon-dle, _gorhoffi_, _llochi_

Fool-ish, _ffol_, _annoeth_

Foot-ing, _cerddediad_; _sefyllfa_, _safle_

Foot-path, _llwybr troed_

Foot-step, _ôl troed_, _cam_; _llwybr_

Foot-stool, _troedfaingc_, _lleithig_

For-age, _gogawr_, _ebran_: _casglu porthiant_

For-bear, _ymattal_; _goddef_

For-bid, _gwahardd_, _gomedd_

Fore-hand, _ym mlaen llaw_

Fore-head, _tal_, _talcen_

For-eign, _estronol_, _tramor_

Fore-man, _blaenor_; _hyfforddwr_

Fore-most, _blaenaf_; _ym mlaenaf_

Fore-see, _rhagweled_; _rhagwybod_

Fore-sight, _rhagolwg_, _rhagwelediad_

For-est, _coedwig_: _fforestu_

Fore-tell, _rhagfynegi_, _darogan_

Fore-ward, _y wyneb_, _y tu wyneb_

Fore-warn, _rhagrybuddio_

For-feit, _camlwrw_, _dirwy_: _fforffedu_

For-ger, _ffugluniwr_, _ffugiwr_

For-get, _ebargofi_, _anghofio_

For-give, _maddeu_, _rhyddhau_

For-lorn, _diymgeledd_, _amddifad_; _gwrthodedig_

Form-al, _ffurfiol_; _rheolaidd_

Form-er, _ffurfiwr_; _cynt_, _blaenorol_

For-sake, _gadael_, _ymadael â_

Fort-night, _pythefnos_

For-tress, _amddiffynfa_, _caer_

For-tune, _tesni_; _ffyniant_; _damwain_; _gwaddol_, _cynnysgaeth_

For-ward, _eon_; _awyddus_; _hyrwyddo_

For-wards, _ym mlaen_, _rhag blaen_

Fos-sil, _mwm_, _mettel_

Fos-ter, _magu_, _maethu_

Found-er, _seiliwr_: _suddo_

Foun-tain, _ffynnon_, _ffynnonell_

Four-fold, _pedwarplyg_

Fowl-er, _adarwr_

Frac-tion, _toriad_, _rhwygiad_; _twnrif_

Frac-ture, _toriad_: _tori_, _dryllio_

Fragile, _brau_, _breuol_

Frag-ment, _dryll_, _darn_, _briwys_

Fra-grance, _perarogledd_

Fra-grant, _peraroglus_

Fran-chise, _braint_, _rhyddfraint_

Frank-ly, _yn rhwydd_, _o fodd_

Fran-tic, _gwallgofus_, _ynfyd_

Free-dom, _rhyddid_; _dinasfraint_

Free-hold, _rhydd-ddaliad_, _rhyddfeddiant_

Free-ly, _yn rhydd_, _yn rhodd_; _yn hael_

Fren-zy, _gorphwyll_, _cynddaredd_

Fre-quent, _mynych_, _aml_

Fret-ful, _anfoddog_, _digofus_

Fri-ar, _mynach_

Fric-tion, _rhathiad_, _rhwbiad_

Fri-day, _dydd Gwener_

Friend-ly, _cyfeillgar_, _caredig_

Friend-ship, _cyfeillach_; _caredigrwydd_

Fri-gate, _ysgafn-long_

Fright-ful, _dychrynllyd_

Fri-gid, _oer_, _oerllyd_; _marwaidd_

Frol-ic, _cellweirgamp_; _gorhoenus_

Frost-y, _rhewlyd_, _rhewllyd_

Fro-ward, _anynad_, _anhywaith_

Frown-ing, _cuchiog_, _cilygus_

Fro-zen, _rhewedig_; _ceuledig_

Fru-gal, _cynnil_, _ymarbedus_

Fruit-ful, _ffrwythlawn_, _cnydfawr_

Frus-trate, _seithug_, _ofer_: _seithugo_; _somi_

Fu-el, _tanwydd_, _cynnud_

Ful-crum, _gwifrwym_, _colpwys_

Ful-fil, _cyflawni_, _gorphen_

Ful-ler, _panwr_, _golchydd_

Ful-ness, _llawndid_, _cyflawnder_

Func-tion, _swydd_, _galwedigaeth_

Fun-nel, _twmffed_; _ffynel_

Fur-long, _ystaden_

Fur-lough, _abseneb_, _ysgrifen drwydded milwr_, _ffyrlo_: _absenebu_

Fur-nace, _ffwrn_; _creisier_, _ffyrnais_

Fur-nish, _dodrefnu_; _cynnysgaeddu_, _darparu_

Fur-row, _cwys_, _rhych_: _cwyso_, _rhychu_

Fur-ther, _ym mhellach_, _eto_, _hefyd_; _pellach_, _eithaf_: _rhwyddhau_

Fu-ry, _cynddaredd_, _ffyrnigrwydd_

Fu-sion, _toddiad_, _dadleithiad_

Fu-ture, _rhag llaw_; _i ddyfod_

Gai-ly, _yn hoyw-wych_; _yn llawen_

Gal-lant, _cariad-ddyn_; _gwrol_, _dewrwych_

Gal-lon, _galwyn_

Gal-lop, _carlam_: _carlamu_

Gal-lows, _crogbren_

Gam-ble, _chwiredu_

Gam-bol, _chwydawiaeth_: _crychlamu_

Game-ster, _chwarëydd_

Gan-der, _ceiliogwydd_

Gan-grene, _madredd_, _braenedd_

Gar-den, _gardd_: _garddu_

Gar-land, _coronbleth_; _talaith_

Gar-ment, _dilledyn_, _gwisg_

Gar-ner, _ysgubor_: _ysguborio_

Gar-nish, _addurniad_: _addurno_

Gar-ret, _nenawr_, _uchystafell_

Gar-ter, _gardys_

Gate-house, _cynhordy_, _porthdy_

Gath-er, _casglu_, _cynnull_

Gath-ers, _plygiadau_

Gaug-ing, _mesuriad llestri_

Ga-zette, _newyddiadur_, _llysnewyddor_

Gaz-ing, _hylldremiol_: _yn syllu_

Gen-der, _rhyw_: _cenedlu_, _eppilio_

Gen-teel, _moesawg_, _gweddaidd-dlws_

Gen-tile, _cenedlddyn_; _cenedlig_

Gen-tle, _boneddig_; _tirion_

Gen-try, _boneddigion_

Get-ting, _caffaelaid_; _ennill_

Gi-ant, _cawr_

Gib-bet, _crogbren_: _crogi_

Gib-bous, _crothog_, _crymaidd_

Gib-lets, _syrth gŵydd_

Gid-dy, _syfrdan_; _anwadal_

Gift-ed, _rhoddedig_; _doniol_

Gild-ing, _goreurad_, _euriad_

Gim-let, _ebillen_, _trwyddew_

Gir-dle, _gwregys_, _rhwymyn_

Glad-den, _lloni_, _llawenhau_

Glar-ing, _llachar_, _eglur_: _yn serenu_

Gleam-ing, _godywynawl_, _llachar_

Glean-ing, _lloffiad_: _lloffa_

Glim-mer, _godywynu_, _gwanlewyrchu_

Glit-ter, _gorddysgleirdeb_: _gorddysgleirio_

Glo-bule, _crynyn_; _defnyn_

Gloom-y, _caddugol_, _cymmylog_; _gobrudd_

Glo-ry, _gogoniant_: _ymogoneddu_

Glow-worm, _y gyfarwydd_, _gloen_

Glut-ton, _glwth_, _rhemmwth_

Gnash-ing, _rhinciad_, _ymgnoad_

Gnaw-ing, _cnoad_, _cnofa_: _cnoi_

God-ly, _duwiol_, _dwyfol_

Go-ing, _mynediad_; _ymadawiad_

Gold-en, _euraid_, _euraidd_

Gold-smith, _eurych_, _gof aur_

Good-ness, _daioni_, _tosturi_

Good-will, _ewyllys da_, _bodd_

Go-ry, _gorllyd_, _gwaedlyd_

Gor-geous, _hoyw-wych_, _claerwych_

Gos-ling, _gwyddan_, _cyw gwydd_

Gos-pel, _efengyl_, _newydd da_

Gov-ern, _llywodraethu_, _rheoli_

Grace-ful, _prydferth_, _teg_

Gra-cious, _rhadlawn_, _trugarog_

Gram-mar, _gramadeg_, _ieithadur_

Gran-deur, _mawrwychder_; _rhwysg_

Gran-ite, _gwenithfaen_

Grap-ple, _gafaelfach_: _bachu_

Grate-ful, _diolchgar_, _derbyniol_

Grat-ing, _alchwaith_; _garw_, _llym_

Gra-tis, _yn rhad_, _yn rhodd_

Grav-el, _marian_, _gro_: _graeanu_

Grav-en, _cerfiedig_

Grav-er, _cerfiwr_; _crifell_

Gra-vy, _sudd cig_

Great-er, _mwy_; _penach_

Great-ness, _mawredd_; _maintioli_

Greed-y, _chwanog_, _awchus_

Greet-ing, _anerch_, _cyfarch_

Griev-ance, _gofid_, _gormes_

Griev-ous, _trwm_, _gorthrwm_, _poenus_

Grind-er, _malwr_; _cilddant_

Grind-ing, _maliad_, _maluriad_

Gris-tle, _madruddyn_, _mwythan_

Groan-ing, _ucheneidiad_

Grot-to, _ogofdy_, _addurngell_

Grow-ing, _cynnyddol_: _yn tyfu_

Grum-ble, _grwgnach_, _tuchan_

Guard-ed, _gwarchodedig_

Guid-ance, _arweiniad_, _tywysiad_

Guild-hall, _bwrdeisdy_, _dadleudy_

Guilt-y, _euog_, _beius_

Gut-ter, _ffos_, _dyfrglawdd_: _ffosi_, _cwteru_

Hab-it, _cyflwr_, _tuedd_, _arfer_, _defod_; _gwisg_: _gwisgo_, _trwsiadu_

Hail-stone, _ceseiryn_, _careg genllysg_

Hal-low, _cyssegru_

Halt-er, _cebystr_, _tenyn_: _cebystru_

Ham-let, _maesdref_, _pentref_

Ham-mer, _morthwyl_; _morthwylio_

Ham-mock, _crogwely_

Hamp-er, _cawell_: _dyrysu_, _maglu_

Hand-ful, _dyrnaid_; _crafangiad_

Han-dle, _carn_; _coes_: _llofi_, _teimlo_, _trin_

Hand-some, _hardd_, _glân_, _prydferth_

Hand-y, _hylaw_; _parod_

Hap-ly, _ysgatfydd_, _o ddamwain_

Hap-pen, _damweinio_, _dygywddo_

Hap-py, _dedwydd_, _gwynfydedig_

Ha-rangue, _araeth_: _areithio_

Har-ass, _aflonyddu_, _blino_

Har-bour, _porthladd_: _llettya_; _noddi_

Hard-en, _caledu_; _ymgaledu_

Hard-y, _caled_, _cadarn_; _calonog_

Hard-ship, _caledi_, _gorthrymder_

Hard-ness, _caledwch_

Hard-ware, _durgelfi_

Har-lot, _putain_, _dyhiren_

Harm-less, _diddrwg_

Har-ness, _harneis_, _trec_: _harneisio_, _cerio_

Harp-er, _telynor_, _telynwr_

Har-poon, _tryfer morfeirch_

Har-row, _og_, _oged_: _llyfnu_, _ogi_

Harsh-ness, _gerwindeb_, _anfwynder_

Har-vest, _cynauaf_: _cynauafu_

Hast-y, _brysiol_; _byrbwyll_

Hatch-et, _bwyell_, _cymmynai_

Hate-ful, _cas_, _atgas_, _ffiaidd_

Hat-ter, _hetwr_, _hetiwr_

Haught-y, _trahäus_, _ffroenuchel_

Ha-ven, _porthladd_, _llongborth_

Hav-ing, _meddiant_; _yn meddu_

Hav-oc, _difrod_: _difrodi_

Hawk-er, _hebogydd_; _gwicwr_

Haw-thorn, _ysbyddad_; _draenen wen_

Hay-rick, _das wair_

Haz-ard, _enbydrwydd_; _antur_: _anturio_; _peryglu_

Ha-zel, _collen_, pl. _cyll_; _gwineu goleu_

Head-ache, _cur pen_

Head-long, _yn bendramwngl_; _serth_; _chwyrnwyllt_

Health-y, _iach_

Hear-ing, _clyw_, _clywedigaeth_; _gosteg_; _gwrandawiad_

Heark-en, _gwrandaw_

Heart-y, _calonog_; _iachus_; _diffuant_

Hea-then, _cenedlddyn_, _ethnig_

Heav-en, _nef_, pl. _nefoedd_

Heav-y, _trwm_, _pwysfawr_; _trist_

Hedge-row, _gwydding_, _gwyddi_

Hedge-hog, _draenog_, _ballog_

Heed-less, _anochelgar_, _esgeulus_

Heif-er, _anner_

Height-en, _uchelu_; _mwyhau_

Hei-nous, _echryslawn_, _ysgeler_

Heir-ess, _etifeddes_

Hel-met, _penwisg dur_, _penffestin_

Help-less, _digymhorth_, _dinodded_

Hence-forth, _bellach_, _rhag llaw_

Her-ald, _achwydd_; _cyhoeddwr_

Herb-age, _porfa_, _tir porfa_; _llysiau_

Herds-man, _bugail_, _deadellwr_

Here-by, _wrth hyn_

Here-in, _yn hyn_; _yma_; _i hyn_

Here-of, _o hyn_

Here-on, _ar hyn_

Here-to, _i hyn_, _at hyn_, _wrth hyn_; _hyd yn hyn_

Here-with, _efo hyn_, _gyda hyn_

Her-mit, _meudwy_, _didryfwr_

He-ro, _arwr_, _gwron_

Her-ring, _penwag_, _ysgadenyn_

Her-self, _hi ei hunan_, _ei hunan_

Hic-cough, _ig_, _yr ig_: _igian_

High-land, _ban_, _ucheldir_

High-ly, _yn fawr_, _yn falch_, _yn uchel_

High-ness, _uchder_; _uchelradd_

High-way, _ffordd fawr_, _prif-ffordd_

Hill-ock, _bryncyn_, _twmpath_

Him-self, _ei hun_, _ei hunan_

Hind-er, _rhwystro_, _attal_

Hire-ling, _gwas cyflog_; _diffeithyn_

Hith-er, _yma_, _hyd yma_

Hoar-frost, _llwydrew_, _barug_

Hoarse-ness, _crygni_, _crygi_

Hold-fast, _gafaelfach_; _dalbren_

Hol-low, _ceule_; _cafnog_: _cafnu_

Hol-ly, _celynen_

Ho-ly, _santaidd_, _glân_

Hom-age, _gwriogaeth_, _ymostyngiad_

Home-ly, _gwladaidd_; _trwsgl_

Home-ward, _adref_, _tuag adref_

Hon-est, _cyfiawn_, _cywir_, _didwyll_, _gonest_

Hon-ey, _mel_; _anwylyd_, _anwylddyn_

Hon-our, _anrhydedd_: _anrhydeddu_

Horn-y, _cornaidd_, _cyrnaidd_

Hor-rid, _erchyll_, _anferth_

Hor-ror, _arswyd_, _dychryn_

Horse-hair, _rhawn_

Hos-ier, _hosanydd_

Host-age, _mach_, _gwystl_

Hos-tile, _gelyniaethus_; _rhyfelgar_

Host-ler, _marchwas_, _ostler_

Hot-house, _twymndy_, _ty brwd_

Hov-el, _penty_, _bwth_

Hour-ly, _bob awr_; _oriawl_

House-hold, _teulu_, _tylwyth_

House-less, _diannedd_, _diartref_

Hous-ing, _hws_, _huling march_

Howl-ing, _udawl_, _udgar_

Hu-man, _dynol_, _dyniadol_

Hu-mane, _hynaws_, _dyngarol_

Hum-ble, _difalch_, _gostyngedig_: _iselu_, _darostwng_

Hu-mid, _gwlyb_, _llaith_

Hu-mour, _irnaws_, _gorlif_; _tymher_: _boddhau_, _mwyndrin_

Hun-dred, _cantref_; _cant_

Hun-ger, _newyn_: _newynu_

Hun-gry, _newynog_; _gwangcus_

Hunt-ing, _helwriaeth_; _helfa_

Hur-dle, _clwyd_, _pleiden_

Hur-ry, _ffrwst_, _brys_: _prysuro_

Hurt-ful, _niweidiol_, _anafawl_

Hus-band, _gwr_; _priod_: _iawndrefnu_

Hy-phen, _cyssylltnod_ (-)

I-cy, _iâin_, _rhewlyd_

I-dle, _segur_; _dioglyd_: _segura_; _diogi_

I-dol, _delw_, _eilun_

Ig-nite, _ennyn_, _tanio_

Ill-ness, _afiechyd_, _clefyd_

Il-lude, _twyllo_; _cellwair_

Im-age, _delw_, _eilun_: _llunio_; _tybied_

Im-bibe, _sugno_, _derbyn_, _llyngcu_

Im-brue, _trochi_, _mwydo_

Im-mense, _anfeidrol_, _tramawr_

Im-merge, Im-merse, _suddo_, _trochi_

Im-pair, _lleihau_; _gwaethygu_

Im-part, _cyfranu_, _rhoddi_

Im-peach, _cyhuddo_, _achwyn ar_

Im-pede, _attal_, _rhwystro_

Im-pel, _cymhell_, _annog_, _gyru_

Im-pend, _ymhongian_; _dynesu_

Im-plore, _attolygu_, _erfyn_

Im-ply, _cynnwys_; _arwyddo_

Im-pose, _gosod ar_, _trethu_; _twyllo_

Im-post, _toll_, _treth_, _cyllid_

Im-press, _argraff_: _argraffu_, _nodi_

Im-prove, _gwelläu_, _diwygio_

Im-pugn, _gwrthwynebu_, _ymosod ar_

Im-pulse, _gwthiad_, _cynhyrfiad_

Im-pure, _ammhur_, _aflan_

Im-pute, _cyfrif_; _priodoli_

In-cense, _arogldarth_: _enyn llid_, _digio_

In-cest, _llosgach_

In-cite, _annog_, _cyffroi_

In-cline, _tueddu_, _gogwyddo_

In-clude, _cau i fewn_, _cynnwys_

In-come, _ardreth_, _cyllid_

In-crease, _cynnydd_: _tyfu_, _cynnyddu_

In-cur, _rhedeg i_; _haeddu_

In-deed, _yn wir_, _yn sicr_

In-dent, _bwlch_: _minfylchu_, _bylchu_

In-dex, _dangoseg_, _mynegfys_

In-dict, _achwyn ar_, _cyhuddo_

In-dite, _cyfansoddi_; _cyhuddo_

In-duce, _tueddu_, _darbwyllo_

In-dulge, _boddhau_, _anwesu_; _caniatau_

In-dure, _parhau_; _dioddef_

In-fant, _maban_, _baban_

In-fect, _llynu_, _adwytho_; _llygru_

In-fer, _casglu_, _tynu casgliad_

In-fest, _dygnflino_, _aflonyddu_

In-firm, _egwan_: _gwanhau_

In-flame, _ennyn_, _fflamio_

In-flate, _ymchwyddo_

In-flect, _plygu i fewn_, _troi_

In-flict, _rhoddi cosb_, _cosbi_

In-flux, _dylifiad_, _ymlanwad_

In-fold, _dyblygu_; _amwisgo_

In-form, _hysbysu_, _cyfarwyddo_

In-fract, _tori_, _dryllio_

In-fringe, _tori cytundeb_, _troseddu_

In-fuse, _tywallt i mewn_; _mwydo_

In-got, _clamp_

In-hale, _atanadlu_, _iddanadlu_

In-ject, _taflu i fewn_, _chwistrellu_

In-join, _gorchymmyn_, _erchi_

In-jure, _niweidio_, _colledu_

In-land, _canoldir_; _canoldirog_

In-let, _ffrydle_, _adwy_

In-mate, _llettywr_, _cytty_

In-most, _nesaf i fewn_, _dyfnaf_

In-ner, _tufewnol_

In-quest, _chwiliad_, _rhaithholiad_

In-quire, _ymofyn_, _holi_

In-road, _ymgyrch_, _rhuthrgyrch_

In-sane, _gwallgofus_

In-scribe, _arysgrifenu_; _cyflwyno_

In-sect, _trychbryfyn_, _trychfilyn_

In-sert, _dodi i fewn_

In-side, _y tu fewn_; _mewnol_

In-sight, _dwfn-olygiad_; _cyfarwyddyd_

In-sist, _sefyll ar_; _honi_; _dirgymhell_

In-spect, _edrych i fewn_, _golygu_

In-spire, _anadlu i_; _ysbrydoli_

In-stall, _urddo_, _graddio_; _gorseddu_

In-stance, _enghraifft_, _cynllun_: _enghraifftio_

In-stant, _cythrym_, _amrantiad_; _ebrwydd_

In-stead, _yn lle_, _tros_; _cystal a_

In-step, _mwnwgl troed_

In-stil, _defnynu i fewn_; _egwyddori_

In-stinct, _greddf_; _bywiog_

In-struct, _addysgu_, _cyfarwyddo_

In-sult, _sarhâd_: _dirmygu_

In-sure, _diogelu_, _digolledu_

In-tend, _meddwl_, _bwriadu_

In-tense, _angerddol_, _tanbaid_

In-tent, _bwriad_, _amcan_; _llwyrfrydig_

In-ter, _claddu_, _daiaru_

In-to, _i_, _i fewn i_

In-trigue, _cuddneges_: _cuddnegeseua_

In-trude, _ymwthio i fewn_; _ymyryd_

In-trust, _ymddiried_

In-vade, _rhuthro i_, _rhuthro_

In-veigh, _difrio_, _cablu_

In-vent, _dyfeisio_, _dychymmygu_

In-verse, _gwrthdroëdig_

In-vert, _gwrthdroi_; _trawsddodi_

In-vest, _gwisgo_, _urddo_; _gosod mewn meddiant_

In-vite, _gwahodd_, _galw_

In-voice, _llwythrestr_

In-voke, _galw ar_, _ymbil_

In-volve, _dyrysu_; _cymmysgu_

In-ure, _cynnefino_, _arferu_

In-ward, _mewnol_; _o'r tu fewn_

In-wards, _coludd_, _perfedd_

Ire-land, _Iwerddon_

I-ris, _yr enfys_, _bwa y gwlaw_

I-ron, _haiarn_: _haiarnu_

Is-land, _ynys_

Is-sue, _mynediad allan_; _canlyniad_; _hiliogaeth_: _tori_, _codi_;
_cyhoeddi_

Isth-mus, _cyfyngdir_, _lleindir_

Itch-ing, _cos_, _cosfa_, _ysfa_

I-tem, _amnaid_; _pen_; _pwngc_; _hefyd_: _cofnodi_

It-self, _ei hun_, _ei hunan_

Jail-er, _ceidwad carchar_

Ja-pan, _arliwio_, _barneisio_

Jaun-dice, _y melyni_, _y cryd melyn_

Jave-lin, _picell_, _gwaewffon_

Jeal-ous, _eiddigeddus_; _amhëus_

Jel-ly, _gludgawl_, _sew_

Jeop-ard, _peryglu_, _enbydu_

Jew-el, _gem_, _em_, _glain_, _tlws_

Jew-ess, _Iuddewes_

Jock-ey, _marchogwr_: _hergwthio_

Join-er, _cyssylltwr_, _asiedydd_

Jour-nal, _coflyfr_; _rhestrydd_

Jour-ney, _taith_: _teithio_

Joy-ful, _llawen_, _gorfoleddus_

Judg-ment, _barn_, _barnedigaeth_

Ju-ly, _Gorphenaf_

Junc-tion, _cydiad_; _undeb_

Junc-ture, _cydiad_; _cysswllt_

Ju-ry, _rheithwyr_

Jus-tice, _cyfiawnder_, _barn_; _ynad_, _ustus_

Keen-ness, _craffder_; _gorawydd_

Keep-er, _ceidwad_, _gwarcheidwad_

Keep-ing, _cadwraeth_

Ken-nel, _ty cŵn_; _ffos budreddi_

Ker-nel, _cnewyllyn_, _bywyn_

Ket-tle, _callawr_, _crochenyn_, _tegell_

Key-hole, _twll y clo_

Kid-ney, _aren_, _elwlen_

Kin-dle, _ennyn_, _cynneu_

Kind-ly, _yn garuaidd_; _yn rhywiog_

Kind-ness, _cymmwynas_, _rhadlonedd_

Kin-dred, _cystlynedd_, _perthynas_; _cydrywiol_; _perthynol_

King-dom, _teyrnas_, _breninaeth_

Kins-man, _câr_, _cyfnesaf_

Kitch-en, _cegin_

Kit-ten, _mabcath_, _cath fechan_

Know-ing, _gwybodus_, _deallus_

Know-ledge, _gwybodaeth_, _dealltwriaeth_

Knuck-le, _migwrn_: _migyrnu_

La-bel, _llabed_, _crogiedydd_

La-bour, _llafur_, _trafael_: _llafurio_, _gweithio_

Lad-der, _ysgol_, _llettring_

Lad-en, _llwythedig_

Lad-ing, _llwyth_; _baich_, _pwn_

La-dle, _lledwad_; _llwy_

La-dy, _arglwyddes_, _pendefiges_

Lamb-kin, _oenan_, _oenyn_, _oenig_

La-ment, _galaru_, _cwynfan_

Lan-cet, _fflaim_

Land-ed, _tiriog_; _wedi tirio_

Land-lord, _meistr tir_; _tafarnwr_

Land-mark, _ffin_, _cyffin_, _terfyn_

Land-scape, _tirolwg_; _arbeiaeth_

Lan-guage, _iaith_: _ymadrodd_

Lan-guid, _llesg_, _methedig_, _egwan_

Lan-guish, _nychu_, _methu_, _dihoeni_

Lan-tern, _erllen_, _llusern_

Lap-wing, _cornchwigl_

Large-ness, _mawredd_, _helaethder_

Last-ing, _parhäus_, _cryf_

Latch-et, _carai esgid_

Late-ly, _yn ddiweddar_

La-tent, _dirgel_, _cuddiedig_

Lath-er, _sebondrwyth_

Lat-ter, _diweddarach_, _hwyrach_

Lat-tice, _dellt_: _delltu_

Laugh-ing, _chwerthiniad_

Laugh-ter, _chwerthin_, _chwardd_

Laun-der, _dyfrgafn_

Laun-dry, _golchdy_, _golchfa_

Lau-rel, _llawrwydd_, _llawryf_

Law-ful, _cyfreithlawn_

Law-suit, _cwyn cyfraith_

Law-yer, _cyfreithiwr_

Lay-er, _haen_, _gwanaf_; _gwely_

Lay-man, _lleygwr_

La-zy, _diog_, _swrth_

Lead-er, _arweinydd_; _blaenor_

Leap-year, _blwyddyn naid_

Learn-ing, _dysg_, _ysgoleigdod_

Leath-er, _lledr_; _croen_

Leav-en, _surdoes_: _surdoesi_

Lec-ture, _llith_, _darlith_: _darlithio_

Led-ger, _cyfriflyfr_, _gorsaflyfr_

Le-gal, _deddfol_, _cyfreithlawn_

Leg-ate, _cenadwr_

Le-gend, _llithlyfr_; _ffugchwedl_

Le-gion, _lleng_, _llu_

Lei-sure, _odfa_, _ennyd_, _hamdden_

Length-en, _estyn_, _hwyhau_

Lep-er, _gwahanglaf_

Lep-rous, _gwahanglwyfus_

Les-see, _dalysgrifiad_

Les-son, _gwers_: _gwersu_, _dysgu_

Let-ter, _llythyren_; _llythyr_: _llythyru_

Lev-el, _gwastadedd_; _gwastad_: _gwastadhau_; _annelu_

Le-ver, _trosol_, _gwif_

Le-vite, _Lefiad_

Lev-y, _cyllid_, _teyrnged_, _treth_

Lewd-ness, _anlladrwydd_

Li-ar, _celwyddwr_

Li-bel, _cabldraith_: _enllibio_

Li-cence, _trwydded_, _rhyddid_

Li-cense, _cenadu_, _trwyddedu_

Life-less, _difywyd_; _marwaidd_

Life-time, _hoedl_; _einioes_

Light-en, _llewyrchu_; _ysgafnhau_

Light-ning, _mellten_, _llucheden_

Like-ly, _tebygol_; _cyffelyb_

Like-ness, _tebygolrwydd_; _llun_

Like-wise, _felly_, _hefyd_

Lim-ber, _llipa_, _ystwyth_

Lim-it, _terfyn_, _ffin_: _terfynu_

Lim-ner, _eiluniwr_, _delweddwr_

Lim-pid, _tryloyw_, _dysglaer_

Lin-en, _llian_, _lliain_

Lin-guist, _ieithydd_

Lin-ing, _gwrthlain_

Lin-net, _llinos_, _llinosen_

Lin-tel, _gwarddrws_, _capan drws_

Li-on, _llew_

Liq-uid, _gwlyb_, _gwlybwr_

Liq-uor, _gwlybwr_, _diod_

Lisp-ing, _bloesgedd_, _bloesgni_

Lis-ten, _gwrando_, _clustfeinio_

Lit-ter, _cludai_; _torllwyth_: _gwasarnu_

Lit-tle, _bach_, _bychan_; _ychydig_

Live-ly, _bywiog_; _heinif_

Liv-er, _yr iau_, _yr afu_; _bucheddwr_

Liv-ing, _bywioliaeth_; _personiaeth_; _byw_; _yn fyw_

Liz-ard, _geneugoeg_, _gwedresi _

Load-stone, _ehedfaen_, _tynfaen_

Loath-some, _ffiaidd_, _atgas_

Lob-by, _cyntedd_, _cynteddfa_

Lob-ster, _ceimwch_, _llegest_

Lo-cal, _lleol_; _sefydlog_

Lo-cate, _llehau_; _sefydlu_

Lock-et, _addurnglo_

Lodge-ment, _lluest_; _sefydliad_; _sefyllfa_

Lof-ty, _uchel_, _dyrchafedig_

Log-ic, _rhesymeg_

Loi-ter, _gohirio_, _llercio_

Long-ing, _hiraeth_, _blys_; _hiraethol_

Loose-ness, _y dolur rhydd_; _dirywiaeth_

Lord-ship, _arglwyddiaeth_

Lo-tion, _golchdrwyth_

Loud-ness, _uchder_, _crochder_, _trwst_

Love-ly, _cariadusol_, _hawddgar_

Lov-ing, _cariadus_, _caredig_

Low-er, _duwch_, _prudd-der_: _gollwng_; _iselu_

Low-ing, _brefiad_, _rhuad_

Low-ness, _iselni_, _iselder_, _gwaeledd_

Loy-al, _ffyddlawn_, _cywir_

Lu-cid, _claer_, _dysglaer_, _goleu_

Luck-y, _llwyddiannus_, _ffodiog_

Lu-cre, _elw_, _ennill_, _budd_

Lug-gage, _cludlwyth_

Luke-warm, _claiar_, _llugoer_

Lum-ber, _hen ddodrefn_; _diddefnydd_

Lu-nar, _lloerawl_, _lleuadol_

Lus-cious, _tra melys_, _gorfelys_

Lust-ful, _cnawdwyllt_, _anllad_

Lus-tre, _gloywder_, _dysgleirder_

Lus-ty, _gwrol_, _cryf_, _grymus_; _corphol_; _iach_

Ly-ing, _celwyddiad_; _gorweddiad_; _celwyddus_: _yn gorwedd_

Ma-chine, _peiriant_; _offeryn_

Mad-am, _meistres_, _arglwyddes_

Mad-der, _y wreiddrydd_

Mad-ness, _gorphwyll_, _cynddaredd_

Mag-got, _cynrhonyn_

Mag-ic, _dewiniaeth_; _swynawl_

Mag-net, _ehedfaen_, _tynfaen tryfaen_

Mag-pie, _pi_, _piogen_

Maid-en, _gwyryf_; _gwyryfol_

Main-ly, _yn benaf_, _yn alluog_

Main-tain, _dal_, _cynnal_, _amddiffyn_; _porthi_

Ma-jor, _uchgadben_; _mwyaf_

Mak-er, _creawdwr_; _gwneuthurwr_

Mak-ing, _gwneuthuriad_

Mal-ice, _cenfigen_; _llid_

Ma-lign, _niweidiol_: _niweidio_

Mal-let, _gordd bren_, _gordd_

Malt-kiln, _odyn frag_

Mal-treat, _cam drin_

Malt-ster, _bragydd_, _bragwr_

Mam-mon, _Mammon_; _cyfoeth_

Man-age, _rheoli_, _trefnu_; _llywodraethu_

Man-date, _arch_, _gorchymmyn_

Man-ger, _preseb_, _cafn ebran_

Man-gle, _cigyddio_; _llyfnhau_

Man-hood, _oedran gwr_, _dyndeb_

Man-kind, _dynolryw_

Man-ly, _glew_, _gwrol_; _dynol_

Man-na, _bara nefol_, _manna_

Man-ner, _modd_, _dull_, _agwedd_

Man-ners, _moesau_; _ymarweddiad_

Man-or, _arglwyddiaeth_, _maenan_

Man-sion, _trigfa_, _cartref_

Man-tle, _mantell_, _cochl_

Ma-nure, _tail_, _gwrtaeth_: _gwrteithio_

Man-y, _llawer_, _aml_, _lluosog_

Mar-ble, _mynor_, _marmor_; _marmoraidd_: _mynori_, _mynorliwio_

Mar-gin, _ymyl_, _cwr_, _goror_

Ma-rine, _morfilwr_; _morawl_

Mar-ket, _marchnad_: _marchnata_

Mar-quis, _ardalydd_, _ardalwr_

Mar-riage, _priodas_; _neithior_

Mar-row, _mer_, _madrudd_

Mar-ry, _priodi_, _ymbriodi_

Mar-shal, _cadlywydd_: _iawndrefnu_

Mar-tial, _milwraidd_, _rhyfelgar_

Mar-tyr, _merthyr_: _merthyru_

Mar-vel, _rhyfeddod_, _syndod_: _rhyfeddu_, _synu_

Ma-son, _saer maen_, _saer ceryg_

Mas-sive, _trwm_, _pwysfawr_, _mawr_

Mas-ter, _meistr_: _meistroli_

Ma-tron, _hynaf-wraig_, _gwreigdda_

Mat-ter, _defnydd_; _mater_, _helynt_

Ma-ture, _addfed_; _oedog_; _mewn oed_

Max-im, _arwiredd_, _gosodedig_

May-or, _maer_

Mead-ow, _dôl_, _gweirglawdd_

Mean-ing, _ystyr_, _meddwl_

Mean-ness, _salwedd_, _gwaelder_

Mean-while, _yn y cyfamser_

Mea-sles, _y frech goch_

Meas-ure, _mesur_; _llestraid_; _ffordd_; _trefn_: _mesuro_, _mesur_

Med-al, _bathodyn_

Med-dle, _ymyru_, _ymyraeth_

Meek-ness, _llareidd-dra_, _tiriondeb_

Meet-ing, _cyfwrdd_; _cyfarfod_

Mel-low, _addfed_: _addfedu_

Mem-ber, _aelawd_, _aelod_

Mem-brane, _pilen_, _croenyn_

Men-tal, _meddyliol_

Men-tion, _crybwyll_: _crybwyllo_

Mer-cer, _sidanydd_

Mer-chant, _masnachwr_

Mer-cy, _trugaredd_, _tosturi_

Mere-ly, _yn unig_, _yn hollol_

Mer-it, _haeddiant_: _haeddu_

Mer-ry, _llawen_, _hoenus_

Mes-sage, _cenadwri_, _neges_

Mes-suage, _ty a thyddyn_, _ty a gardd_

Met-al, _delid_, _mettel_

Me-ter, _mesurydd_

Meth-od, _trefn_, _ffordd_, _modd_

Me-tre, _mydr_, _mesur_

Met-tle, _mettel_; _awch_; _calon_

Mid-dle, _canol_, _hanner_

Mid-day, _hanner dydd_, _canol dydd_

Mid-night, _canol nos_

Mid-wife, _byd-wraig_

Might-y, _galluog_, _cadarn_

Mi-grate, _treiglo_, _symmud trigias_

Mil-dew, _y gawod_, _melgawod_

Mild-ness, _tiriondeb_, _tynerwch_

Mile-stone, _careg filldir_

Mill-dam, _cronfa_, _argae melin_

Mill-er, _melinydd_

Mill-pond, _llyn melin_

Mill-ion, _buna_, _miliwn_

Mim-ic, _dynwaredydd_: _dynwaredu_

Mind-ful, _meddylgar_, _gofalus_

Min-er, _mwngloddiwr_

Min-gle, _cymmysg_: _cymmysgu_

Mi-nor, _un dan oed_; _bychan_; _llai_

Min-strel, _clerwr_, _cerddwr_

Mi-nute, _bach_, _manwl_

Min-ute, _munud_: _cofnodi_

Mi-nutes, _cofnodau_

Mir-ror, _drych_; _cynllun_

Mis-chief, _drwg_, _drygioni_: _drygu_

Mis-deed, _drwgweithred_

Mi-ser, _cybydd_, _crintachwr_

Mis-lead, _camarwain_

Mis-sion, _anfoniad_, _cenadaeth_

Mis-take, _camgymmeriad_, _gwall_

Mis-tress, _meistres_, _dysgawdwraig_

Mis-trust, _drwgdyb_, _pryder_

Mi-tre, _capan côr_, _meitr_

Mix-ture, _cymmysg_; _cymmysgiad_

Mod-el, _cynllun_: _cynllunio_

Mod-ern, _newydd_, _diweddar_

Mod-est, _llednais_, _gwylaidd_

Moist-ure, _irdra_, _lleithdra_

Mo-lest, _ystuno_, _aflonyddu_

Mo-ment, _meidyn_, _amrantiad_

Mon-arch, _brenin_, _teyrn_

Mon-day, _dydd Llun_

Mon-ey, _mwnai_, _arian bathol_

Moor-ing, _angorfa_, _angorle_

Mon-ster, _cynfil_, _anghenfil_

Mon-strous, _anghenfilaidd_, _gwrthun_

Month-ly, _misol_, _bob mis_

Moon-light, _goleuleuad_, _lloergan_

Mo-ral, _moeswers_; _moesol_

Mo-rals, _moesau_; _ymarweddiad_

Mo-rass, _cors_, _siglen_

Mor-bid, _heintiol_, _afiach_

Morn-ing, _bore_, _boreu_; _boreuol_

Mo-rose, _anynad_, _anniddig_

Mor-row, _mory_, _y fory_

Mor-sel, _tamaid_, _safnaid_

Mor-tal, _marwol_; _angeuol_

Mor-tals, _daiarblant_, _marwolion_

Mor-tar, _cymrwd_, _mâl-lestr_

Mort-gage, _arwystl_: _arwystlo_

Mort-main, _meddiant anaralladdwy_

Most-ly, _gan mwyaf_, _yn amlaf_

Moth-er, _mam_

Mo-tion, _chwyf_, _chwim_; _ysgogiad_; _cynnygiad_

Mo-tive, _cynhyrfiad_; _egwyddor_

Mot-to, _arwyddair_, _arwyddwers_

Move-ment, _symmudiad_

Mov-ing, _cynhyrfiol_, _ymsymmudol_

Mould-er, _troi yn llwch_, _malurio_

Mould-ings, _addurngerfiadau_

Mould-y, _llwyd_, _brithlwyd_

Moun-tain, _mynydd_, _moel_

Mourn-er, _galarwr_, _cwynfanwr_

Mourn-ful, _galarus_, _trist_, _trwm_

Mourn-ing, _arwylwisg_; _galar_

Mouth-ful, _safnaid_, _tamaid_

Mud-dy, _lleidiog_, _lleidlyd_

Mun-dane, _bydol_, _bydawl_

Mur-der, _llofruddiaeth_: _llofruddio_

Mur-mur, _grwm_, _murmur_: _gwrgnach_

Mur-rain, _pla_, _milbla_

Mus-cle, _cyhyr_, _llyweth_

Mu-sic, _cerddoriaeth_; _peroriaeth_

Mus-tard, _ceddw_, _mwstardd_

Mus-ter, _byddinbrawf_: _byddino_; _profi_

Mus-ty, _llwyd_; _drewllyd_

Mut-ton, _cig dafad_, _mollt_

Muz-zle, _geneu_; _penffrwyn_: _penffrwyno_

Myr-tle, _myrtwydd_

My-self, _mi fy hun_

Nail-er, _hoelydd_, _hoeliwr_

Na-ked, _noeth_, _llwm_; _anarfog_

Name-ly, _wrth enw_; _sef_, _hyny yw_

Nar-rate, _traethu_

Nar-row, _cul_, _cyfyng_: _culhau_

Na-sal, _trwynol_

Nas-ty, _brwnt_; _aflan_, _budr_

Na-tion, _cenel_, _cenedl_

Na-tive, _brodor_, _priodor_; _genedigol_

Na-ture, _anian_, _natur_; _y byd_; _rhyw_

Naugh-ty, _diriaidd_; _drwg_

Na-val, _llyngesawl_; _morawl_

Na-vel, _bogel_; _y canol_

Nau-seous, _gwrthwyneblyd_, _ffiaidd_

Neap-tide, _llanw isel_

Near-er, _nes_, _nesach_, _agosach_

Neat-ness, _destledd_, _tlysni_

Need-ful, _dir_, _rhaid_, _cyfreidiol_

Nee-dle, _nydwydd_; _gwachell_

Need-y, _anghenog_, _tlawd_

Neg-lect, _diofalwch_: _esgeuluso_

Neigh-bour, _cymmydog_

Nei-ther, _nid yr un or ddau_; _na_, _nac_, _ychwaith_

Neigh-ing, _gweryriad_

Neph-ew, _nai_

Nerv-ous, _giawg_, _giawl_, _gewynog_; _nerthol_, _cryf_

Nes-tle, _nythu_; _adeinio_

Nest-ling, _nythgyw_, _cywyn_

Neth-er, _is_, _isach_, _iselach_

Net-tle, _danadl poeth_: _pigo_; _cyffroi_

Nev-er, _erioed_; _byth_

Neu-ter, _amhleidiol_; _canolydd_

New-ness, _newydd-deb_

New-ly, _o newydd_, _yn ddiweddar_

Nick-name, _llysenw_: _llysenwi_

Nig-gard, _crinwas_, _cybydd_: _crintach_

Nim-ble, _cyflym_, _heinif_

Nip-pers, _gefail_, _gefeilan_

No-ble, _ardderchog_, _godidog_; _boneddig_

Nois-y, _trystfawr_, _bloeddfawr_

Non-sense, _ffoledd_, _ffregod_

Non-suit, _anhawl_: _dihawli_

North-ward, _tua 'r gogledd_

Nos-tril, _ffroen_

No-ted, _nodedig_, _hynod_

Noth-ing, _dim_, _diddym_

No-tice, _sylw_, _rhybydd_

No-tion, _tyb_, _barn_, _rhith_

Nov-el, _newydd chwedl_; _newydd_

Nou-rish, _maethu_, _magu_

Nox-ious, _afiach_, _niweidiol_

Nui-sance, _blinbeth_, _casbeth_

Num-ber, _rhif_, _rhifedi_: _rhifo_

Nup-tial, _priodasol_

Nup-tials, _priodas_, _neithior_

Nur-ture, _maeth_, _maethiad_: _meithrin_, _addysgu_

Oat-meal, _blawd ceirch_

O-bey, _ufuddhau_, _ymostwng_

Ob-ject, _gwrthrych_, _nod_: _eithro_, _gwrthwynebu_

Ob-late, _llethbegynol_

O-blige, _rhwymo_; _boddio_

Ob-lique, _gŵyr_, _lleddf_; ystlysol

Ob-long, _hirgul_, _cul_

Ob-scene, _brwnt_, _aflan_

Ob-scure, _aneglur_; _anhawdd_: _tywyllu_; _dyrysu_

Ob-serve, _dal sylw_, _sylwi_; _parchu_, _ufuddhau_

Ob-struct, _attal_, _rhwystro_

Ob-tain, _cael_, _caffael_, _cyrhaeddyd_

Ob-trude, _ymwthio_; _trawsgymmell_

Oc-cult, _cuddiedig_, _dirgel_

Oc-cur, _dygwydd_; _dyfod i gof_

O-cean, _cefnfor_, _yr eigion_

O-dour, _arogl_, _sawyr_

Of-fals, _syrth_; _gweddillion_

Of-fence, _camwedd_, _trosedd_; _tramgwydd_

Of-fend, _troseddu_; _tramgwyddo_

Of-fer, _cynnyg_, _cais_: _offrymu_

Of-fice, _swydd_; _gwasanaeth_; _swyddfa_

Off-sets, _ysgewyll_; _bonflagur_

Off-spring, _hiliogaeth_, _hil_

Oft-en, _yn fynych_, _yn aml_

Oint-ment, _enaint_, _eli_

Ol-ive, _olewydden_

O-men, _argoel_, _rhagarwydd_, _coel_

O-mit, _gadael heibio_; _esgeuluso_

One-ness, _undod_, _unedd_

On-ly, _unig_; _yn unig_; _ond_

On-ward, _ym mlaen_, _rhagof_

O-paque, _tywyll_, _anoleu_

O-pen, _agored_; _amlwg_; _rhydd_

Op-pose, _gwrthwynebu_; _cyferbynu_

Op-press, _gorthrymu_, _gorthrechu_

Op-tic, _dremyr_; _golygawl_, _tremawl_

Op-tion, _dewisiad_: _dewis_

O-ral, _o enau i enau_; _geiriol_

Or-bit, _cylchdro_, _cylchdaith_

Or-chard, _perllan_, _afallach_

Or-dain, _gosod_, _trefnu_; _urddo_

Or-der, _trefn_, _rheol_: _trefnu_; _erchi_

Or-ders, _gorchymmynion_; _urddau_

Or-gan, _organ_; _offeryn_, _peiriant_

Or-phan, _plentyn amddifad_; _amddifad_

Os-trich, _estrys_

Oth-er, _all_, _arall_, _llall_

Ot-ter, _dyfrgi_, _dwfrgi_

O-val, _hirgrwn_, _wyfal_

O-ven, _ffwrn_

O-ver, _ar_, _uchben_, _tros_, _rhy_, _trosodd_

Our-selves, _ni ein hunain_

Out-break, _toriad allan_

Out-cast, _crwydryn_; _alldud_

Out-cry, _gwaedd_, _bloedd_, _dolef_

Out-do, _rhagori_, _blaenu ar_

Out-er, _allanol_, _nes allan_

Out-fit, _darpariad i fordaith_

Out-law, _herwr_; _ysbeiliwr_: _dinoddi_

Out-line, _amlinell_; _brasluniad_

Out-live, _byw yn hwy_, _goroesi_

Out-rage, _dirdra_, _trais_; _terfysg_: _dirtreisio_; _sarhau_

Out-side, _y tu allan_; _allanol_

Out-ward, _allanol_; _i barthau tramor_

Own-er, _perchenog_, _meddianydd_

Ox-ford, _Rhydychain_

Oys-ter, _llymarch_, _llymarchen_

Pack-age, _pynordal_

Pack-et, _sypyn_; _llythyrgod_

Pad-dle, _rhodl_; _rhwyf_: _rhodli_; _rhywyfo_

Pad-lock, _clo march_, _clo egwyd_

Pa-gan, _cenedlddyn_, _pagan_

Pain-ful, _poenus_, _gofidus_; _llafurus_

Paint-ing, _paentiad_; _llun_, _darlun_

Pa-lace, _llys_, _plas_, _palas_

Pal-ate, _taflod y genau_, _gorchfannedd_; _archwaeth_, _blas_

Pal-ing, _cledrgae paliswaith_

Pal-sy, _parlys_, _haint y gïau_

Pal-try, _distadl_, _gwael_

Pam-phlet, _llyfran_, _llyfryn_

Pan-cake, _cremmog_, _crammwyth_

Pan-el, _pennill_, _pedronglyn o esdyllwaith_

Pan-ic, _dychryn_, _arswyd_; _disymmwyth_

Pan-nel, _panel_, _ystrodur_

Pa-pal, _pabawl_, _pabaidd_

Pa-per, _papur_: _papuro_

Pa-pist, _pabydd_

Pa-rade, _rhodres_; _rhwysg_, _ymddangosfa_

Par-cel, _sypyn_; _cyfran_: _rhanu_, _dyranu_

Par-don, _maddeuant_: _maddeu_

Pa-rent, _tad neu fam_, _rhiant_

Par-ing, _piliad_; _crawen_

Par-ings, _pilion_, _naddion_, _creifion_

Par-ish, _plwy_, _plwyf_; _plwyfol_

Par-lour, _parlawr_, _gwestgell_

Par-son, _offeiriad_, _person_

Par-take, _cyfranu_; _cyfranogi_

Par-tial, _rhanol_, _hannerog_; _pleidiol_

Part-ing, _gwahaniad_; _ymadawiad_

Part-ly, _mewn rhan_, _o ran_

Part-ner, _cydwedd_, _cyfranogwr_; _cyfaill_

Part-ridge, _coriar_, _petrusen_

Par-ty, _un_, _rhyw un_; _plaid_; _achos_

Pas-sage, _tramwyfa_, _trosglwydd_; _gwers_, _ymadrodd_

Pas-sion, _dyoddefaint_; _gwŷn_, _nwyd_; _gwylltineb_; _traserch_

Pas-sive, _y goddefai_, _y dioddefai_

Pass-port, _taithdrwydded_

Pas-time, _darchware_, _difyrwch_

Pas-tor, _bugail_; _gweinidog_

Pas-ture, _porfa_: _porfäu_

Pat-ent, _breintlythyr_; _agored_, _cyhoedd_

Pa-tience, _amynedd_, _ymaros_

Pa-tient, _dyn claf_, _claf_; _amyneddus_

Pa-tron, _tadog_, _noddwr_, _ymgeleddwr_

Pat-tern, _llun_, _cynllun_

Pave-ment, _palmant_, _llechlawr_

Pay-ment, _tâl_; _taledigaeth_

Peace-ful, _heddychol_, _heddychlawn_

Peas-ant, _gwladeiddiwr_

Peb-ble, _gröyn_, _caregan_

Ped-ler, _gwicawr_, _gwicwr_

Peer-age, _cyfurddoriaeth_, _pendefigaeth_

Peev-ish, _anynad_, _anfoddog_, _croes_

Pe-nal, _cosbawl_, _ponydiawl_

Pen-ance, _penyd_; _cyfarchwel_

Pen-cil, _pwyntel_: _paentio_, _darlunio_

Pend-ant, _dibynydd_; _clustdlws_; _baner_

Pend-ing, _yn dibynu_; _dan ystyriaeth_

Pen-man, _ysgrifenydd_, _cyfansoddwr_

Pen-ny, _ceiniog_

Pen-sion, _talwobr_, _talddogn_

Pen-sive, _athrist_, _prudd_, _meddylgar_

Peo-ple, _maon_, _pobl_

Pep-per, _poethlys_, _pupur_

Per-ceive, _dirnad_, _canfod_

Per-fect, _perffaith_: _perffeithio_

Per-form, _cyflawni_, _cwblhau_; _chware_

Per-fume, _perarogl_: _perarogli_

Per-haps, _ysgatfydd_, _efallai_

Per-il, _perygl_, _enbydrwydd_

Per-ish, _marw_, _trengi_, _diflanu_

Per-jure, _tyngu anudon_, _anudoni_

Per-mit, _trwyddedlythyr_: _caniatau_, _goddef_

Per-plex, _dyrysu_; _dwysflino_

Per-sist, _sefyll at_; _dal at_; _taeru_

Per-son, _dyn_, _gwr neu wraig_, _un_; _dynsawd_; _dull_

Per-spire, _anadlu trwodd_; _chwysu_

Per-suade, _darbwyllo_; _annog_; _eiriol_

Per-tain, _perthyn_: _perthynu_

Per-vade, _tryddedu_; _treiddio_, _ymledu_

Per-verse, _gwrthgas_: _gwyrdroi_

Per-use, _tryddarllen_, _darllen_

Pet-als, _blodeuddail_

Pet-ty, _back_, _gwael_, _isel_

Phan-tom, _tremyniad_, _drychiolaeth_

Phi-al, _costrelig_; _ffiol_

Phon-ics, _seinddysg_

Phys-ic, _meddyginiaeth_

Phys-ics, _anianyddiaeth_, _dansoddiaeth_

Pick-axe, _cyfegydd_, _caibfwy ell_

Pick-et, _pigbawl_; _gwyliwr_

Pic-ture, _llun_, _darlun_: _darlunio_

Pierc-ing, _llym_, _tostlym_, _treiddiol_

Pil-fer, _chwiwladrata_, _chwiwbigo_

Pil-grim, _pererin_: _pererinio_

Pil-low, _gobenydd_, _clustog_: _clustogi_

Pi-lot, _llonglywydd_, _llywiedydd_

Pim-ple, _piloryn_, _pisgen_

Pin-cers, _gefail_, _gwrthrimyn_

Pin-fold, _gwarchae_

Pin-ion, _asgell_; _hual_, _aden_: _esgyllrwymo_, _hualu_

Pin-nace, _ysgafnlong_, _badlong_

Pi-ous, _duwiol_, _crefyddol_

Pi-rate, _morleidr_

Pis-tol, _llawddryll_

Pis-ton, _diblath_, _gwasglath_, _ceuffon_

Pitch-er, _piser_, _cunnog_

Pitch-fork, _pig_, _pigfforch_

Pit-y, _trugarhau_, _tosturi_

Piv-ot, _corddyn_, _colyn_; _pegwn_

Pla-card, _hysbysiad_, _egluryn_

Plain-ness, _gwastadrwydd_; _gonestrwydd_

Plain-tiff, _cwynwr_, _hawl-blaid_

Plan-et, _planed_, _goruchiad_

Plas-ter, _cymmrwd_, _plastar_

Plat-form, _llwyfan_; _esgynlawr_

Plat-ter, _dysgl_, _noe_

Play-ful, _chwareugar_

Plead-ing, _arddaliad_, _dadleuad_

Plead-ings, _cynghawsaeth_

Pleas-ant, _hyfryd_, _teg_; _llon_, _tirion_

Pleas-ing, _boddus_, _boddhaol_; _hoff_

Plea-sure, _hyfrydwch_; _difyrwch_

Plen-ty, _helaethrwydd_, _amledd_; _digonedd_

Pli-ant, _hyblyg_, _ystwyth_

Plough-share, _swch_

Plu-mage, _plu_; _esgyll_

Plumb-er, _plymiwr_, _plwmweithydd_

Plun-der, _ysbail_: _anrheithio_

Plu-ral, _lliosog_, _lluosog_

Ply-ing, _plygiad_; _ymroddiad_

Poach-ing, _herw-hela_

Pock-et, _llawgell_, _llogell_: _llogellu_

Po-em, _pryddest_, _cân_, _cerdd_

Poe-sy, _awenyddiaith_; _barddoneg_

Po-et, _awenydd_, _prydydd_, _bardd_

Poign-ant, _llym_, _pigog_

Point-er, _pwyntiwr_; _cyfeirgi_

Poi-son, _gwenwyn_: _gwenwyno_

Po-lar, _pegynawl_

Po-lice, _dinaslywodraeth_, _treflywiaeth_

Pol-ish, _caboledd_: _caboli_

Po-lite, _moesawg_, _moesgar_

Pol-lute, _halogi_, _diwyno_

Pom-pous, _rhwysgfawr_, _gorwych_

Pon-der, _ystyried_, _myfyrio_

Pon-tiff, _archoffeiriad_, _y Pab_

Po-ny, _corfarch_; _merlyn_, _merlen_

Poor-ly, _yn salw_; _gwael_

Pop-lar, _poplysen_

Po-rous, _chwysdyllog_; _tyllog_

Por-poise, _llemidydd_

Port-age, _arian clud_; _porthdal_

Por-tend, _argoeli_, _darogan_

Port-er, _porthor_, _drysor_

Por-tion, _rhan_, _cyfran_; _cynnysgaeth_

Port-hole, _cyflegrdwll_, _gwndwll_

Por-trait, _arlun_, _llun_; _arluniad_

Por-tray, _arlunio_; _paentio_

Pos-sess, _meddu_, _meddiannu_, _perchenogi_

Pos-set, _posel_, _meiddlyn_

Post-age, _llythrdoll_

Post-pone, _troi heibio_; _oedi_, _gohirio_

Post-script, _olysgrifen_

Pos-ture, _ystum_, _sefyllfa_; _agwedd_

Po-tent, _erddrym_, _galluog_, _cryf_

Pot-ter, _crochenydd_, _priddlestrydd_

Poul-tice, _sugaethan_; _meddalai_

Poul-try, _dôf-adar_; _adarfa_

Pound-er, _pwyedydd_; _cyflegr_

Pow-der, _llwch_, _pylor_: _llychu_

Pow-er, _gallu_, _nerth_; _awdurdoa_

Prac-tice, _arfer_, _arferiad_

Prac-tise, _arferu_, _ymarfer_

Pray-er, _gweddi_, _deisyfiad_

Preach-er, _pregethwr_

Preach-ing, _pregethiad_

Pre-cede, _blaenori_, _blaenu_

Pre-cept, _gorchymmyn_, _cyfraith_

Pre-cinct, _cylchran_, _terfyn_

Pre-cious, _gwerthfawr_, _drud_

Pre-cise, _pendant_, _penodol_; _cywir_

Pre-clude, _rhagrwystro_, _rhagattal_

Pre-dict, _rhagfynegi_; _daroganu_

Pref-ace, _rhaglith_: _rhagymadroddi_

Pre-fect, _rhaglaw_

Pre-fer, _dewis o flaen_, _blaenberchi_

Pre-fix, _blaenddod_, _arddodiad_: _darddodi_

Preg-nant, _beichiog_; _ffrwythlawn_

Prel-ate, _esgob_

Pre-lude, _rhagchware_; _cynarawd_

Pre-mier, _cynwas_, _prif weinidog_; _blaenaf_, _penaf_, _prif_

Pre-mise, _rhagosod_, _cynseilio_

Pre-pare, _paratoi_, _darparu_

Pres-age, _rhagarwydd_, _arwydd_: _darogan_

Pre-scribe, _rhagnodi_, _cyfarwyddo_

Pres-ence, _gŵydd_, _presennoldeb_

Pre-sent, _anrheg_; _presennol_: _anrhegu_; _dangos_

Pre-serve, _cyffeithfwyd_: _cadw_, _noddi_, _gwared_; _cyffeithio_

Pre-side, _rheoli_, _rhageistedd_

Pres-sure, _gwasgiad_, _gwasgfa_

Pre-sume, _tybio_, _meddylied_; _anturio_

Pre-tence, _cyfrith_; _ymhoniad_

Pre-tend, _lledrithio_, _ffugio_

Pret-ty, _pefr_, _tlws_

Pre-vail, _tycio_, _llwyddo_, _gorchfygu_

Pre-vent, _rhagodi_; _rhwystro_

Priest-hood, _offeiriadaeth_

Pri-mate, _prif esgob_

Prim-er, _cynlyfr_; _penllythyren_

Prin-cess, _tywysoges_

Print-er, _argraffydd_, _argraffwr_

Print-ing, _argraffyddiaeth_

Pri-or, _penmynach_; _cyntaf_, _blaenorol_

Pri-son, _carchar_, _carchardy_

Pri-vate, _cuddfa_, _uniged_; _cyfrin_, _dirgel_; _unig_; _neillduol_

Priv-y, _cyfrin_, _dirgel_, _cudd_

Pro-bate, _cymmynbrawf_

Prob-lem, _dyrys destyn_, _dyfnbwngc_

Pro-ceed, _cynnyrchiant_, _ennill_; _dilyn_, _myned ym mlaen_; _deillio_,
_tarddu_

Pro-cess, _mynediad ym mlaen_; _cynghawsedd_

Pro-claim, _cyhoeddi_

Proc-tor, _dirprwywr_, _dadleuwr_

Pro-cure, _ceisio_, _caffael_; _prynu_

Pro-duce, _cynnyrch_: _dwyn allan_; _cynnyrchu_, _deilliaw_

Prod-uct, _daill_, _cynnyrch_

Pro-fane, _halog_; _halogedig_: _halogi_

Pro-fess, _proffesu_, _cyffesu_; _dilyn_

Prof-fer, _cynnygiad_: _cynnyg_

Pro-file, _ystlyswyneb_, _ystlyswedd_

Pro-fit, _budd_, _elw_: _buddio_, _ennill_

Pro-found, _dwfn_, _gorddwfn_; _mawr_

Pro-fuse, _trahael_, _afradus_

Pro-gress, _mynediad ym mlaen_, _ymdaith_, _cynnydd_

Pro-ject, _dyfais_, _cynllun_: _dyfeisio_

Pro-logue, _rhagymadrodd_, _rhagarawd_

Pro-long, _estyn_, _hwyhau_, _oedi_

Prom-ise, _addaw_, _addewid_: _addaw_, _addo_

Pro-mote, _dwyn ym mlaen_; _dyrchafu_

Pro-noun, _rhagenw_

Pro-nounce, _traethu_, _cyhoeddi_, _acenu_

Proof-sheet, _prawflen_, _proflen_

Pro-pel, _gyru ym mlaen_

Pro-pense, _tueddol_, _chwannog_

Prop-er, _priod_, _priodol_; _cymhwys_

Proph-et, _proffwyd_

Pro-pose, _cynnygiad_: _bwriadu_; _cynnyg_

Pro-rogue, _gordori_, _gohirio_

Pros-pect, _ardrem_, _rhagolwg_

Pros-per, _llwyddo_; _cynnyddu_

Pros-trate, _ar lawr_: _ymostwng_

Pro-tect, _amddiffyn_, _noddi_

Pro-test, _gwrthfarn_: _gwrthdystio_

Pro-tract, _oedi_, _gohirio_, _estyn_

Pro-trude, _gwthio ym mlaen_, _hyrddu_

Proud-ly, _yn falch_; _yn rhyfygus_

Prov-erb, _dareb_, _diareb_

Pro-vide, _darpar_, _darparu_

Prov-ince, _talaeth_; _gorchwyliaeth_

Prov-ing, _profiad_: _yn profi_

Pro-voke, _annog_, _cyffroi_, _blino_

Prov-ost, _uchelfaer_, _arlywydd_

Prox-y, _dirprwy_

Pru-dence, _callineb_, _pwyll_

Pru-dent, _synwyrol_, _deallus_

Pry-ing, _chwileniad_; _chwilgar_

Pub-lic, _cyffredin_, _gwladwriaeth_; _cyhoeddus_

Pub-lish, _cyhoeddi_, _gosod allan_

Pud-ding, _poten_

Pud-dle, _corbwll_; _lleidiog_

Pul-let, _cywen_, _cyw iar_

Pul-ley, _chwerfan_

Pul-pit, _areithle_, _areithfa_

Pul-pous, _bywynaidd_; _meddal_

Pun-gent, _llym_, _irad_, _tost_

Pun-ish, _cosbi_, _ceryddu_

Pu-pil, _canwyll llygad_; _dysgybl_

Pup-py, _colwyn_, _ci bach_

Pur-blind, _cibddall_

Pur-chase, _pryniad_: _prynu_

Pure-ly, _purion_, _yn bur_

Purg-ing, _carthiad_: _rhyddni_

Pur-loin, _darnguddio_; _lladrata_

Pur-port, _amcan_, _ystyr_: _arwyddo_

Pur-pose, _amcan_, _bwriad_: _amcanu_

Pur-sue, _canlyn_: _ymlid_

Pur-suit, _ymlid_, _erlid_

Pus-tule, _pendduyn_, _goryn_

Pu-trid, _braenllyd_, _llygredig_

Put-ty, _sythdoes_, _glud_

Puz-zle, _dyryswch_: _dyrysu_

Qua-drant, _pedryran_

Quak-ing, _cryn_, _cryndod_; _crynawl_

Quar-rel, _amrafael_: _amrafaelio_

Quar-ry, _cloddfa_: _ysglyfio_

Quar-ter, _pedwareddran_; _parth_, _man_; _crynog_, _pêg_; _gorsaf_:
_pedwaru_; _llettya_

Quar-to, _pedwarplyg_

Qua-ver, _crychyn_: _crychnodi_

Que-rist, _gofynwr_, _holydd_

Que-ry, _holiad_, _gofyniad_: _gofyn_, _holi_

Ques-tion, _gofyniad_: _holi_, _gofyn_

Quick-en, _bywhau_; _brysio_

Quick-sand, _traeth byw_, _sugndraeth_

Qui-et, _llonyddwch_; _llonydd_: _llonyddu_

Quil-let, _clytyn_, _garddan_

Quiv-er, _saethgawell_: _crynu_

Quo-tient, _cynniferydd_

Rab-bit, _cwningen_

Rab-ble, _gwerinos_, _dynionach_

Rab-id, _cynddeiriog_, _gorphwyllog_

Ra-dix, _gwreiddyn_; _dechreuad_

Raf-ter, _ceibren_, _tylath_

Rag-ged, _carpiog_, _bratiog_

Rag-ing, _cynddeiriogiad_; _gwyllt_, _creulawn_

Rail-ing, _cledrgae_; _canllawiad_

Rai-ment, _dillad_; _gwisg_

Rain-bow, _enfys_, _bwa 'r gwlaw_

Rain-y, _gwlawog_

Rais-ing, _codiad_, _dyrchafiad_

Ral-ly, _gwawdio_; _adfyddino_

Ram-ble, _gwib_, _gwibdaith_: _gwibio_

Ram-mer, _hyrddiedydd_; _gordd_

Ram-ming, _hyrddiad_, _pwyad_

Ram-pant, _ar y rhuthrnaid_; _afreolus_

Ram-part, _gwrthglawdd_, _rhagfur_

Ran-cid, _mws_, _drewllyd_

Ran-cour, _hen lid_, _cenfigen_

Ran-dom, _antur_; _damweiniol_; _ar antur_, _heb feddwl_

Rang-ing, _trefniad_; _crwydrawl_

Ran-sack, _gorchwylio_; _ysbeilio_

Ran-som, _prydwerth_: _prynu_

Rap-id, _chwyrn_; _gwyllt_

Rap-ture, _perlewyg_, _gorllonedd_

Rare-ly, _yn anaml_, _yn brin_

Ras-cal, _dyhiryn_

Rash-ness, _byrbwylldra_

Ra-tio, _dogn_, _cyfran_; _cyfartaliaeth_

Rath-er, _yn hytrach_, _o flaen_

Rat-tle, _rhugl_: _rhugldrystio_

Ra-ven, _cigfran_

Ra-vine, _crigyll_, _morgilfach_

Rav-ing, _penwendid_; _penwan_

Rav-ish, _treisio_; _gorlloni_

Ra-zor, _ellyn_

Reach-ing, _cyrhaeddiad_

Read-ing, _darlleniad_

Read-y, _parod_; _hwylus_, _medrus_

Re-al, _gwir_, _gwirioneddol_; _diffuant_

Reap-er, _medwr_, _medelwr_

Rear-guard, _olfyddin_, _olwarchadlu_

Rea-son, _rheswm_: _rhesymu_

Re-bate, _rhigoli_, _toli_

Re-bel, _gwrthryfelwr_: _gwrthryfela_

Re-bound, _gwrthnaid_: _gwrthneidio_

Re-build, _adadeiladu_, _ailadeiladu_

Re-buke, _cerydd_: _ceryddu_

Re-but, _olgilio_

Re-call, _gwrthalw_, _adalw_

Re-cant, _dadgyffesu_, _dad-ddywedyd_

Re-cede, _encilio_: _ymattal_

Re-ceipt, _derbyneb_, _taleb_

Re-ceive, _derbyn_; _caffael_

Re-cent, _newydd_, _gonewydd_

Re-cess, _cil_, _encil_; _ciliad_

Re-cite, _adrodd_, _datgan_

Reck-less, _diofal_, _difeddwl_

Reck-on, _cyfrif_, _rhifo_; _barnu_

Re-claim, _adferu_, _dychwelyd_

Re-cline, _lledogwyddo_, _lledorwedd_

Re-cord, _cofiant_, _coflyfr_: _coffäu_, _cofrestru_

Re-cruit, _adlenwad_: _adlenwi_, _codi gwyr_

Rec-tor, _person_, _periglor_

Re-cur, _adredeg_, _adgyrchu_

Red-dish, _lledgoch_, _cochlyd_

Re-deem, _prynu_, _rhyddhau_

Re-doubt, _rhag-gaer_, _rhagfur_

Re-dress, _esmwythâd_: _iawni_, _ysgafnhau_

Re-duce, _ennill_, _adferu_; _iselu_, _goresgyn_

Re-fer, _gosod ar_, _cyfeirio at_, _golygu_

Re-fine, _puro_, _coethi_

Re-fit, _adgyweirio_, _aildaclu_

Re-flect, _adlewyrchu_; _adfyfyrio_; _gwarthruddo_

Re-flux, _gwrthlif_, _adlif_

Re-form, _diwygiad_: _diwygio_

Re-fract, _gwrthdori_, _dadlewyrchu_

Re-frain, _attal_, _ffrwyno_: _ymarbed_

Re-fresh, _adloni_, _dadebru_

Ref-uge, _nawdd_, _noddfa_

Re-fund, _ad-dalu_, _adferu_

Re-fuse, _ysgubion_, _gwehilion_: _nacäu_, _gomedd_

Re-fute, _gwrthbrofi_, _dadbrofi_

Re-gain, _adgaffael_, _ailennill_

Re-gal, _breiniol_, _teyrnol_

Re-gale, _gwledd_, _breninwledd_

Re-gard, _golygiad_; _parch_: _golygu_; _parchu_

Re-gent, _llywydd_: _rhaglywyddu_

Re-gion, _ardal_, _bro_; _awyrbarth_; _lle_

Re-gret, _gofid_, _blinder_: _gofidio_

Re-hearse, _datgan_; _prawfdraethu_

Re-ject, _gwrthod_; _anghymmeradwyo_

Re-joice, _llawenhau_, _llawenychu_

Re-lapse, _adlithriad_: _adlithro_

Re-late, _adrodd_; _perthynu_

Re-lax, _llac_: _llacau_, _llwfrhau_

Re-lay, _newidfeirch_; _bwlch_, _adwy_

Re-lease, _rhyddhâd_: _rhyddhau_

Re-lent, _tyneru_; _edifarhau_

Rel-ic, _gweddill_, _gwarged_

Rel-ict, _gweddw_, _gwraig weddw_

Re-lief, _cymhorth_, _cynnorthwy_

Re-lieve, _cynnorthwyo_; _symmud_

Rel-ish, _blas_, _chwaeg_: _blasu_, _archwaethu_

Re-ly, _hyderu_, _ymddiried_

Re-main, _aros_, _trigo_; _parhau_

Re-mains, _gweddillion_; _corph y marw_

Re-mand, _gwrthalw_, _adanfon_

Re-mark, _nod_, _nodiad_: _nodi_, _sylwi_

Re-mind, _adgofio_, _ailgoffa_

Re-miss, _llac_, _esgeulus_, _hwyrfrydig_

Re-mit, _dychwelyd_, _adanfon_, _trosglwyddo_

Re-morse, _ymgno_, _dwysbigiad_

Re-mote, _pell_, _anghyfagos_

Re-move, _mud_; _symmudfa_: _mudo_, _symmudo_, _symmud_

Rend-er, _rhwygwr_: _talu_, _ad-dalu_

Re-new, _adnewyddu_

Re-nounce, _ymwrthod_, _gwadu_

Re-nown, _bri_, _clod_: _enwogi_

Rent-al, _ardrethlyfr_, _rhentlyfr_

Re-pair, _cyweiriad_: _adgyweirio_

Re-past, _pryd o fwyd_, _adlonbryd_

Re-pay, _ad-dalu_, _talu yn ol_

Re-peal, _diddymiad_: _diddymu_

Re-peat, _mynychnod_: _ailadrodd_, _adrodd_

Re-pel, _gwrthguro_, _cilgwthio_

Re-pent, _edifarhau_

Re-pine, _ymofidio_, _grwgnach_

Re-place, _adsefydlu_

Re-ply, _ateb_, _gwrthateb_: _atebu_

Re-port, _chwedl_; _mynegiad_: _adrodd_, _mynegi_

Re-pose, _pwys_, _gorphwysdra_: _gorphwyso_, _huno_, _hyderu_

Re-press, _attaliad_: _attal_, _ffrwyno_

Re-prieve, _gwarant dienoed_: _dienoedi_

Re-proach, _sarhâd_, _gwarth_: _gwaradwyddo_

Re-proof, _ceryddu_, _argyhoeddiad_

Re-prove, _ceryddu_, _argyhoeddi_

Rep-tile, _ymlusgiad_; _ymlusgawl_

Re-pulse, _cilgwth_: _gwrthguro_

Re-pute, _parch_, _bri_: _golygu_, _parchu_

Re-quest, _arch_, _deisyfiad_: _deisyfu_

Re-quire, _gofyn_, _ceisio_

Re-quite, _talu_, _gwobrwyo_

Res-cue, _gwarediad_: _gwaredu_

Re-search, _adchwiliad_: _dyfalgeisio_

Re-sent, _atteimlo_

Re-serve, _olfyddin_; _pwylledd_: _cadw_

Re-side, _aros_, _cartrefu_, _preswylio_

Re-sign, _rhoddi i fyny_, _ymroddi_

Re-sist, _gwrthsefyll_, _gwrthwynebu_

Re-solve, _bwriad_: _bwriadu_, _penderfynu_

Re-sort, _cynhulliad_: _cynniwair_

Re-sound, _adseinio_, _adleisio_

Re-source, _adnawdd_; _noddfa_; _dyfais_

Re-spect, _cymmeriad_, _bri_, _parch_: _parchu_, _ystyried_

Re-spire, _anadlu_

Res-pite, _oed_, _oediad_, _hamdden_: _adoedi_, _gohirio_

Re-spond, _atebu_, _gorebu_

Rest-ful, _llonydd_, _esmwyth_

Rest-ive, _rhusog_, _ystrangclyd_

Rest-less, _aflonydd_; _dihun_

Re-store, _adroi_, _adferu_; _achub_

Re-strain, _attal_, _ffrwyno_, _cyfyngu_

Re-straint, _attaliad_, _caethiad_

Re-strict, _attal_, _cyfyngu_

Re-sult, _canlyniad_: _tarddu_, _deillio_

Re-sume, _adgymmeryd_, _ailddechre_

Re-tail, _manwerth_: _manwerthu_

Re-tain, _dal_, _cadw_; _cofio_

Re-tard, _rhwystro_, _lluddias_, _attal_

Re-tire, _ymneullduo_, _encilio_

Re-tort, _fferyllwydryn_; _gwrthsen_: _gwrthsenu_

Re-trace, _adolrhain_

Re-tract, _dadgyffesu_, _dad-ddywedyd_

Re-treat, _cil_, _encil_: _cilio_, _encilio_

Re-trench, _amgloddio_; _amddiffyn_

Re-turn, _dychwel_, _dychweliad_: _dychwel_

Re-veal, _datguddio_, _egluro_

Re-venge, _dialedd_: _dialeddu_, _dial_

Re-vere, _parchu_, _anrhydeddu_

Re-verse, _tro_, _troad_, _cyfnewidiad_: _gwrthdroi_, _gwrthwynebu_

Re-vert, _troi yn ol_, _dychwelyd_

Re-view, _adolygiad_: _adolygu_

Re-vile, _difenwi_, _cablu_

Re-vise, _eilbrawf_: _ailbrofi_

Re-vive, _adfywio_, _bywiogi_

Re-voke, _gwrthalw_, _diddymu_

Re-volt, _gwrthryfel_: _gwrthryfela_

Re-volve, _amdroi_, _cylchdroi_

Re-ward, _gwobr_: _gwobrwyo_

Rich-es, _cyfoeth_, _golud_, _meddiannau_

Rich-ness, _cyfoethogrwydd_; _brasder_

Rick-ets, _y llechau_, _y llechi_

Rid-den, _marchogedig_

Rid-dle, _dychymmyg_; _rhidyll_: _rhidyllu_

Rid-ing, _parthran_; _marchogiad_

Rig-ging, _tacliad_, _gwisgiad_

Right-eous, _cyfiawn_, _uniawn_

Rig-id, _anhyblyg_, _llym_

Ri-gour, _gerwindeb_, _llymder_

Ring-worm, _gwreinyn_, _taroden_

Ri-ot, _afreolaeth_, _terfysg_: _gloddesta_; _terfysgu_

Ris-ing, _codiad_; _esgynfa_

Ri-val, _cydymgeisiwr_: _cydymgeisio_

Riv-er, _afon_

Roar-ing, _rhuad_; _rhuadwy_

Rob-ber, _ysbeiliwr_, _lleidr_

Ro-bust, _cadarn_, _cryf_, _grymus_

Rock-et, _tanbelen_

Roe-buck, _iwrch_, _carw_

Ro-man, _Rhufeinwr_; _Rhufeinig_

Ro-mance, _ffugdraith_: _ffugchwedleua_

Ro-sin, _ystor_, _ystawr_: _ystoru_

Rot-ten, _braenllyd_, _braenedig_

Rough-cast, _braslun_; _garwgresten_

Rough-ly, _yn arw_, _yn erwinol_

Rough-ness, _garwder_, _gerwindeb_

Round-ness, _crynder_

Rous-ing, _deffroad_; _cyffroad_: _cyffröus_

Rou-tine, _arfer_, _arferiad_, _defod_

Roy-al, _breninol_, _teyrnaidd_

Rub-bish, _malurion_; _gwedillion_

Rud-der, _llyw_

Rud-dy, _rhudd_, _rhuddgoch_

Rude-ness, _difoesedd_, _anfoes_

Ruff-ian, _hurlofrudd_, _adyn_; _ffyrnig_

Ruf-fle, _crychio_, _annhrefnu_; _cyffroi_

Rug-ged, _garw_, _sarug_; _anwastad_

Ru-in, _dystryw_, _dinystr_; _adfail_: _dystrywio_; _diadeilio_

Rul-er, _llinellwr_, _rheolwr_, _llywydd_

Rum-mage, _manwl chwilio_

Ru-mour, _chwedl_, _gair_: _cyhoeddi_

Run-ner, _rhedydd_, _rhedegydd_, _rhedegwr_

Run-ning, _rhedegog_; _rhedeg_

Rup-tion, _breg_, _toriad_, _rhwygiad_

Rup-ture, _rhwyg_; _toriad llengig_

Ru-ral, _gwledig_, _gwladol_; _moesol_

Rush-ing, _rhuthriad_, _ymwthiad_

Rus-tic, _gwerinwr_; _gwerinol_

Rust-y, _rhydlyd_; _llwyd_

Ruth-ful, _tosturiol_, _trugarog_

Rye-bread, _rhygfara_

Sab-bath, _gorphwysfa_; _Sabbath_

Sa-bre, _byrgleddyf_

Sack-cloth, _sachlen_, _sachliain_

Sack-ing, _difrodiad_; _sachiad_

Sa-cred, _santaidd_, _cyssegredig_

Sad-dle, _cyfrwy_: _cyfrwyo_

Sad-ness, _tristwch_, _prudd-der_

Safe-guard, _amddiffynfa_, _ymdeithnawdd_

Safe-ty, _diogelwch_, _diogelfa_

Sail-cloth, _hwyl-liain_

Sail-or, _morwr_, _llongwr_

Sal-ine, _halenawg_, _hallt_

Sal-low, _merhelygen_; _melynlwyd_

Sa-loon, _uchelneuadd_

Salt-ish, _halltaidd_

Sal-vage, _achubdal_

Sa-lute, _cyfarch_, _anerch_: _cyfarch_

Sam-ple, _golygyn_, _cynbrawf_

Sanc-tion, _cadarnhâd_: _cadarnhau_

San-guine, _gwaedlyd_, _gwresog_

Satch-el, _trythgod_, _llyfrgod_

Sav-age, _anwariad_; _gwyllt_, _ffyrnig_: _anwareiddio_, _creuloni_

Sau-cy, _coeg_, _cras_; _coeglyd_

Sav-ing, _achubiad_; _cadwedigol_

Sav-iour, _achubwr_, _gwaredwr_

Sa-vour, _sawr_, _arogl_; _blas_: _archwaethu_

Saw-dust, _llifion_, _lliflwch_

Saw-yer, _llifiwr_, _llifiedydd_

Say-ing, _dywediad_, _ymadrodd_, _gair_

Scab-bard, _gwain cleddyf_

Scaf-fold, _esgynlawr_, _esgynlwyd_

Sca-lade, _muresgyniad_, _dringediad_

Scan-dal, _tramgwydd_; _gwarth_: _athrodi_, _gwaradwyddo_

Scan-ning, _chwiliad_, _profiad_

Scan-ty, _prin_, _cwta_, _bychan_

Scat-ter, _gwasgaru_, _chwalu_

Scep-tic, _amheuwr_

Scep-tre, _teyrnwialen_

Sched-ule, _chwaneglen_, _dibynlen_

Schol-ar, _ysgolhaig_, _ysgolawr_

Sci-ence, _gwyddiant_; _trefniant_; _celfyddyd_

Scis-sors, _gwellifyn_; _myswrn_

Scorch-ing, _deifiad_, _crasboethiad_

Scorn-ful, _ysgornllyd_, _diystyrllyd_

Scoun-drel, _dyhiryn_, _adyn_

Scour-ing, _ysgwriad_, _arloesiad_

Scram-ble, _ciprys_: _ciprysu_

Scrap-ing, _crafion_, _creifion_

Scrib-ble, _coegysgrifen_: _brasysgrifenu_

Scrip-ture, _ysgrythyr_

Scrub-bing, _rhwbiad_

Scru-ple, _anon_; _petrusder_: _petruso_

Scuf-fle, _ceintach_: _ceintachu_, _ymdynu_

Sculp-tor, _cerfiedydd_, _cerfiad_

Scut-tle, _cawell_, _cafn_; _gwaddedig_

Sea-man, _morwr_, _llongwr_

Sea-son, _tyhmor_, _amser_, _pryd_: _tymheru_, _pereiddio_, _blasuso_

Sea-weed, _mordywys_, _gwymon_

Se-cede, _ymwahanu_, _hanredu_

Se-clude, _cau allan_, _gwrthod_

Sec-ond, _ail_, _pleidiwr_, _cefnogwr_: _eiliaw_, _cynnorthwyo cefnogi_

Se-cret, _cyfrinach_, _diogelwch_; _cuddiedig_, _dirgel_

Se-crete, _cuddio_, _didoli_, _neillduo_

Sec-tion, _toriad_, _rhan_, _dosparth_

Se-cure, _diogel_, _sicr_; _diogelu_, _sicrhau_

Se-date, _tawel_, _digynhwrf_, _esmwyth_

Se-duce, _denu_, _llithio_, _hudo_

See-ing, _gwelediad_, _y golwg_; _yn gymaint_, _gan fod_, _gan_

Seem-ly, _gweddaidd_, _hardd_; _cymhwys_

Seg-ment, _dernyn_, _tafellddarn_

Seign-ior, _arglwydd_, _meistr_

Seiz-ure, _daliad_, _attafaeliad_

Sel-dom, _yn anfynych_, _yn anaml_

Se-lect, _dewisol_: _dewis_, _dethol_

Self-ish, _hunanol_

Self-same, _yr un_, _nid arall_

Sell-ing, _gwerthiad_, _gwerthedigaeth_

Sen-ate, _senedd_, _seneddr_

Sense-less, _ynfyd_, _ffol_, _disynwyr_

Sen-tence, _barn_, _dedfryd_, _brawddeg_: _barnu_, _dedfrydu_

Sen-try, _gwyliwr_, _gwyliedydd_

Se-quel, _canlyniad_, _diweddiad_

Se-rene, _teg_, _tawel_, _hinonaidd_: _tawelu_, _lloni_

Ser-mon, _pregeth_; _traethawd_

Ser-pent, _sarph_

Ser-vant, _gwas_, _gweinidog_

Ser-vice, _gwasanaeth_; _hail_

Ser-vile, _gwasawl_, _caethwasaidd_

Ses-sion, _eisteddfa_, _eisteddfod_

Set-tle, _cadairfaingc_: _sefydlu_, _sicrhau_; _gwastadhau_, _penderfynu_

Sev-en, _saith_

Sev-er, _didoli_, _gwahanu_, _dosparthu_

Se-vere, _tost_, _llym_, _creulawn_

Sew-er, _gwnïwr_; _dyfrffos_

Sex-ton, _bedd-dorwr_, _clochydd_

Shab-by, _bawaidd_, _gwael_

Shac-kle, _hual_, _gefyn_: _hualu_, _llyffetheirio_

Shad-ow, _cysgod_; _rhuth_; _cysgodi_

Shak-ing, _cryniad_, _ysgydiad_

Shal-low, _basle_; _bas_, _beisiawg_

Sham-bles, _cigfa_, _cigle_

Shame-ful, _gwaradwyddus_, _gwarthus_

Shape-less, _aflunaidd_, _dilun_

Shar-ing, _rhaniad_; _cyfranogiad_

Sharp-en, _awchu_, _hogi_

Shat-ter, _dryllio_, _chwilfriwio_

Shav-ing, _eilliad_; _rhasglio_

Shav-ings, _gonaddion_, _rhasglion_

Sheath-ing, _gweiniad_; _amblangciad_

Sheep-fold, _cail_, _corlan_

Sheep-walk, _defeidiawg_, _pordir defaid_

Sheer-grass, _hesg_

Shell-fish, _cragenbysg_

Shel-ter, _cysgod_, _achles_: _cysgodi_

Shelv-ing, _llechweddaidd_; _llethrog_

Shep-herd, _bugail_, _bugeilydd_

Sher-iff, _sirydd_

Shil-ling, _swllt_

Shin-ing, _claer_, _dysglaer_

Ship-wreck, _llongdor_; _llongdoriad_

Ship-wright, _llongsaer_, _saer llongau_

Shiv-er, _asgri_, _delltddarn_: _crynu_

Shock-ing, _echryslawn_, _arswydus_

Shoe-ing, _archeniad_; _pedoliad_

Short-en, _byrhau_, _cwtogi_

Short-ly, _yn fyr_, _ar fyr_, _yn fer_

Should-er, _ysgwydd_, _yspawd_: _ysgwyddo_

Shout-ing, _bloeddiad_, _banllefiad_

Show-er, _cawod_: _cawodi_

Shrewd-ness, _cyfrwysdra_, _calldra_

Shriv-el, _crychu_, _crebychu_

Shud-der, _crynfa_: _crynu_

Shuf-fle, _rhithesgus_: _cyfrwysdroi_

Shut-ter, _cauad_, _gwerchyr_

Shut-tle, _gwenol gwehydd_

Sic-kle, _cryman_, _nillai_

Sick-ly, _clafus_, _clwyfus_, _lledglaf_

Side-board, _ystlysfwrdd_

Side-ways, _yn gyfarystlys_, _yn wysg ei ochr_

Sigh-ing, _ucheneidiad_, _ochain_

Sig-nal, _arwydd_, _awgrym_; _hynod_: _hynodi_

Sig-net, _sel_, _insel_, _selfodrwy_

Sign-ing, _llawnodiad_, _seliad_

Si-lence, _taw_, _gosteg_: _gostegu_, _tawelu_

Si-lent, _dystaw_; _mud_; _didwrf_

Silk-worm, _sidanbryf_, _pryf sidan_

Sil-ly, _ffol_, _ansynwyrol_

Sil-ver, _arian_: _arianu_

Sim-mer, _lledferwi_, _sician_

Sim-ple, _cyffin_; _syml_; _annichellgar_; _digymmysg_

Sim-ply, _yn syml_; _yn unig_

Sin-cere, _gwir_, _cywir_, _diragrith_

Sin-ew, _gaw_, _gewyn_

Sin-ful, _pechadurus_, _camweddus_

Sin-gle, _syml_; _unig_, _unigol_

Sink-ing, _suddiad_, _soddiad_; _treuliad_

Sin-ner, _pechadur_, _troseddwr_

Sis-ter, _chwaer_

Sit-ting, _eisteddiad_, _eisteddfod_

Six-fold, _chwethro_, _chwephlyg_

Six-pence, _chwecheiniog_

Six-ty, _triugain_

Skil-ful, _medrus_, _hyfedr_, _celfydd_

Skin-ner, _crwynwr_; _blingwr_

Skip-ping, _llamsachiad_, _neidiad_

Skir-mish, _ysgarmes_: _ymryson_

Sky-lark, _ehedydd_

Sky-light, _nenwawl_

Slan-der, _athrod_, _absen_: _athrodi_, _absenu_

Slaugh-ter, _lladdfa_: _lladd_, _cigyddio_

Slen-der, _main_; _egwan_; _prin_

Slight-ly, _yn ysgafn_, _yn ysgornllyd_

Slop-ing, _lledbeiad_, _llechweddiad_

Sloth-ful, _diog_, _swrth_, _musgrell_

Slov-en, _bawai_, _swgar_, _annhaclus_

Slug-gard, _segurddyn_, _diogyn_

Slum-ber, _hun_, _dargwsg_: _huno_, _hepian_

Small-pox, _y frech wen_

Smel-ling, _arogliad_

Smooth-ly, _yn esmwyth_, _yn rhwydd_

Smoth-er, _tawch_, _mygdarth_: _mygu_; _tagu_

Snaf-fle, _genfa_, _ffroenfa_: _ffrwyno_

Snow-ball, _pelen eira_

Snuff-ers, _salltrin_, _glâniadur_

Soak-ing, _mwyd_, _mwydiad_

Sock-et, _twll_, _mortais_; _crai_

Sod-den, _berw_; _berwedig_

Soft-en, _meddalhau_, _meddalu_

Soft-ness, _meddalwch_, _tynerwch_

So-journ, _ymdaith_; _trigo_, _aros_

Sol-ace, _cysur_: _cysuro_

Sol-ar, _heulfa_

Sol-dier, _milwr_, _sawdiwr_

Sol-emn, _difrifol_; _goruchel_

Sol-id, _cyfangorph_; _sylweddol_; _caled_

Sol-stice, _heulorsaf_

Solv-ent, _trwyth_, _a dawdd_; _abl i dalu_

Some-how, _yn rhw fodd_

Some-thing, _rhywbeth_

Some-what, _rhywbeth_

Some-where, _yn rhywle_

Song-ster, _caneuwr_, _cantwr_

Sooth-say, _dewinio_

Song-stress, _cantores_

Soph-ist, _twyllddadleuwr_

Sor-did, _bawlyd_, _brwnt_; _crintach_

Sor-row, _tristwch_, _gofid_: _tristäu_

Sor-ry, _trist_; _salw_, _gwael_

Sound-ing, _dyfnder_; _seiniad_; _seinfawr_

Sound-ly, _yn ddwys_, _yn dda_

South-ward, _tu a'r dehau_

Sow-ing, _hëad_, _hauad_

Spa-cious, _eang_, _helaeth_

Spare-rib, _asen y fran_, _culasen_

Spar-ing, _prin_, _cynil_

Spar-row, _aderyn_, _y to_

Speak-er, _llafarwr_, _ymadroddwr_

Speak-ing, _llafariad_

Spe-cial, _neillduol_; _arbenigol_

Spe-cies, _arian bathawl_, _bath_; _rhyw_, _rhywogaeth_

Speech-less, _mud_, _dilafar_

Speed-y, _buan_, _cyflym_, _ebrwydd_

Spell-ing, _silliad_, _sillafiad_

Spi-der, _cor_, _pryfcopyn_

Spin-dle, _gwerthyd_; _echel_

Spir-it, _ysbryd_: _calonogi_

Spite-ful, _migus_, _dygas_

Spit-tle, _poer_, _poeryn_

Splen-did, _claer_, _ysblenydd_

Splen-dour, _gwychder_, _ceinedd_

Splint-er, _dyfloen_, _dellten_: _delltenu_

Spon-sor, _mach_, _mechniydd_

Spright-ly, _bywiog_, _gorhoenus_, _siongc_

Sprin-kle, _taenellu_, _ysgeinio_

Sput-ter, _ffwdan_, _godwrdd_: _bwrw poer_

Squad-ron, _llynges_, _byddin_

Squan-der, _gwasgaru_, _gwastraffu_

Squeak-ing, _gwichiad_; _gwichiog_

Squeez-ing, _gwasgiad_

Squir-rel, _gwiwer_, _y wiwer_

Sta-ble, _marchdy_; _diysgog_, _sefydlog_

Stag-ger, _hongcian_; _petruso_

Stag-gers, _dera_, _penddaredd_

Stag-nant, _llonydd_, _marw_

Stag-nate, _croni_, _llynio_

Stam-mer, _attalddywedyd_: _bloesgi_

Stand-ard, _lluman_, _baner_; _prawfreol_; _gosodedig_

Stand-ing, _safiad_, _safle_; _sefydlog_; _parhad_

Sta-ple, _marchnadfa_; _sefydledig_

Star-ing, _hylldremiol_

Star-ling, _drudwy_

Start-ing, _cychwynfa_

State-ly, _uchelwych_, _balch_

States-man, _gwladwr_, _gwladwriaethol_

Stat-ics, _pwysyddiaeth_

Sta-tion, _sefyllfa_, _gorsaf_; _galwad_: _sefydlu_, _gorsafu_

Stat-ue, _delw_, _cerflun_

Stat-ure, _maint_, _uchder_

Stat-ute, _gosodedigaeth_, _deddf_

Stead-fast, _sicr_, _dianwadal_, _diysgog_

Stead-y, _diwamal_, _diysgog_

Stealth-y, _lladradaidd_; _dirgel_

Steep-ing, _mwydiad_; _mwydawl_

Stee-ple, _clochdy_

Steep-ness, _serthedd_, _llethredd_

Steer-age, _llywiad_; _llywle_

Ster-il, _diffrwyth_; _anfuddiol_

Ster-ling, _gwirfath_; _cyfreithlawn_

Stew-ard, _goruchwyliwr_; _dystain_

Stiff-en, _sythgaledu_; _sythu_

Still-born, _marwanedig_

Still-ness, _tawelwch_, _dystawrwydd_

Stin-gy, _crintach_, _anhael_

Stink-ing, _drewllyd_, _drygsawrus_

Sti-pend, _tâl_, _cyflog_

Stir-rup, _gwrthafl_

Stoak-er, _tânborthwr_

Stock-ing, _hosan_

Stom-ach, _cylla_; _chwant bwyd_; _digter_: _digio_, _ffromi_

Stop-page, _arosiad_

Store-house, _ystordy_

Sto-ry, _hanes_; _chwedl_: _rhoi hanes_

Stow-age, _ystôrle_; _ystordai_

Strag-glers, _gwibgrwydiaid_

Straight-en, _unioni_, _uniawni_

Straight-ways, _yn uniongyrchol_

Strait-en, _tynhau_; _cyfyngu_

Stran-ger, _alldud_, _estron_

Stran-gle, _tagu_, _llindagu_

Stra-tum, _haen_; _gwanaf_; _gwely_

Stream-ing, _ffrydiad_; _ffrydiol_

Stream-let, _corffrwd_, _ffrydan_

Strength-en, _nerthu_, _grymuso_

Stretch-er, _ymestynwr_; _tynfaingc_

Strict-ness, _caethder_, _manylrwydd_

Strik-ing, _hynod_, _nodedig_; _od_

Strin-gent, _bolrwymol_, _caethrwym_

Strip-ling, _glaslangc_, _llencyn_

Struc-ture, _adail_, _adeiladaeth_; _ffurf_

Strug-gle, _ymdrech_: _ymryson_

Stub-ble, _soflyn_, _pl._ _sofl_

Stu-dent, _myfyriwr_, _astudiwr_

Stud-y, _myfyriad_; _llyfrgell_: _myfyrio_, _dilyn dysg_

Stum-ble, _tramgwydd_, _trip_: _tramgwyddo_

Stu-pid, _hurt_, _syfrdan_

Stu-por, _hurtrwydd_, _syndod_

Stur-dy, _ystyfnig_, _haerllug_; _cryf_

Stut-ter, _cecian_

Sub-due, _goresgyn_, _darostwng_

Sub-ject, _deiliad_; _pwngc_; _darostynedig_: _darostwng_

Sub-join, _adchwanegu_; _cyssylltu_

Sub-lime, _uchel_, _goruchel_

Sub-mit, _ymostwng_, _ymroddi_

Sub-orn, _dirgel-lithio_, _dirgel-ddysgu_

Sub-scribe, _tanysgrifio_; _cydsynio_

Sub-side, _gwaelodi_; _ymlonyddu_

Sub-sist, _gorsefyll_, _parhau_; _byw_, _bod_

Sub-stance, _sylwedd_, _defnydd_; _swm_, _cyfoeth_, _moddion_

Sub-tend, _tanledu_, _ymestyn dan_

Sub-tile, _manw_; _treiddiol_, _cyfrwys_

Sub-tle, _cyfrwys_, _ystrywgar_

Sub-tract, _tynu ymaith_, _erthynu_

Sub-vert, _dadymchwel_; _gwyrdroi_

Sub-urb, _rhagddinas_, _maerdref_

Suc-ceed, _olynu_, _canlyn_; _llwyddo_

Suc-cess, _llwydd_, _llwyddiant_; _canlyniad_

Suc-cinct, _tacledig_; _cryno_, _byr_

Suc-cour, _porth_, _cymhorth_, _help_: _cynnorthwyo_; _ymgeleddu_

Suc-tion, _sugn_, _sugndyniad_

Sud-den, _disyfyd_, _dirybudd_

Su-et, _gwer_, _brasder caled_

Suf-fer, _goddef_, _dyoddef_; _caniatau_

Suf-fice, _digoni_, _diwallu_, _boddloni_

Suf-frage, _pleidlais_, _llais_

Su-gar, _sugr_, _siwgwr_: _siwgro_

Sug-gest, _arafgrybwyll_, _sibrwd_

Suit-or, _erfyniwr_; _carwr_

Sulk-y, _anfoddog_, _afrywiog_

Sul-len, _sarug_, _cuchiog_

Sul-phur, _brwmstan_, _mygfaen_

Sul-try, _mwrn_; _tesog_

Sum-mer, _haf_; _hafaidd_: _hafota_

Sum-mit, _pen_, _copa_, _crib_; _blaen_

Sum-mon, _gwysio_; _galw_

Sum-mons, _gwys_, _dyfyn_

Sun-beam, _pelydryn_, _mychedyn_

Sun-day, _dydd Sul_

Sun-dry, _amryw_, _amrywiol_

Sun-rise, _codiad haul_

Su-perb, _mawrwych_, _mawreddog_

Sup-per, _swper_: _swperu_

Sup-plant, _dadymchwelyd_, _disodli_

Sup-ple, _ystwyth_: _ystwytho_

Sup-ply, _porth_, _cymhorth_; _adgyflenwad_: _cyflenwi_, _cynnorthwyo_

Sup-port, _atteg_, _cynnaliaeth_: _attegu_, _cynnal_

Sup-pose, _tybio_, _tybied_, _meddylied_

Sup-press, _gwasgu i lawr_, _llethu_; _dirgelu_

Su-preme, _uchaf_, _goruchaf_

Sure-ness, _sicrwydd_; _dïewrwydd_

Sure-ty, _mach_, _mechniydd_

Sur-face, _gwyneb_, _arwyneb_; _clawr_

Sur-feit, _alar_, _gorlwyth_: _alaru_, _gorlwytho_

Sur-geon, _llawfeddyg_

Sur-ly, _surllyd_, _anhynaws_

Sur-mise, _tyb_, _llettyb_: _lleddybio_

Sur-mount, _codi dros_, _gorchfygu_

Sur-name, _cyfenw_: _cyfenwi_

Sur-pass, _rhagori ar_, _uwchlaw_

Sur-plice, _gwenwisg_

Sur-plus, _gwarled_, _gweddill_

Sur-prise, _syndod_, _aruthraw_: _dyrysu_

Sur-round, _cylchynu_, _cwmpasu_

Sur-vey, _golwg_; _mesur_: _arolygu_, _mesur_

Sur-vive, _gorfucheddu_, _oloesi_

Sus-pect, _drwgdyb_: _drwgdybio_

Sus-pend, _crogi wrth_; _oedi_, _gohirio_

Sus-pense, _amheuaeth_, _oediad_

Sus-tain, _cynnal_, _cynnorthwyo_, _porthi_, _helpio_; _goddef_

Swad-dle, _ffunen_, _rhwymyn_: _ffunenu_, _rhwymynu_

Swag-ger, _bolchwyddo_, _gwagfrolio_

Swal-low, _gwenol_; _llyngcle_: _llyngcu_

Swarth-y, _melynddu_, _cibddu_

Swear-ing, _twng_, _tyngiad_; _llw_

Sweep-ings, _ysgubion_

Sweet-ness, _melusder_; _addfwynder_

Swell-ing, _chwyddiad_, _chwydd_

Swift-ness, _buandra_, _cyflymdra_

Swim-mer, _nofiwr_, _nofiedydd_

Swin-dler, _hudleidr_

Swiv-el, _bolldid_; _trorwy_

Sword-fish, _cleddbysg_

Syl-van, _coed-dduw_; _coedaidd_

Symp-tom, _argoel_, _arwydd_

Syn-od, _cymmanfa_; _cydfa_

Syn-tax, _cystrawen_, _cystrawiaeth_

Syr-inge, _chwistrell_: _chwistrellu_

Sys-tem, _egwyddoriaeth_, _cyfundraeth_

Tab-let, _llechen_; _taflen_

Tac-it, _dystaw_, _tawedog_

Tack-ling, _taclau_, _offer_

Tac-tics, _byddindrefniad_, _cadyddiaeth_

Tai-lor, _dilledydd_

Tak-ing, _cymeriad_, _attafaeliad_

Tal-ent, _dawn_, _rhodd_, _galluedd_

Talk-ing, _siarad_, _ymadroddiad_

Tal-low, _gwer_; _gweren_

Tal-on, _ewin_, _crafangc_, _palf_

Tame-ly, _yn ddof_

Tan-ner, _crwyngyffeithydd_

Ta-per, _cwyren_; _brigfain_: _brigfeinhau_

Tar-dy, _diweddar_, _hwyr_; _musgrell_

Tar-get, _tarian_, _bwccled_

Tar-nish, _diwyno_, _anurddo_

Tar-ry, _aros_, _trigo_, _tario_

Tar-iff, _trosglwydd-doll_

Taw-ny, _melynddu_, _dufelyn_

Teach-er, _addysgwr_, _athraw_

Tem-per, _tymher_: _tymheru_

Tem-pest, _corwynt_, _enawel_, _tymhestl_

Tem-ple, _teml_; _arlais_

Tem-ples, _arleisiau_

Tempt-er, _hudwr_, _llithiwr_

Ten-ant, _deiliad_, _daliwr tir_

Ten-der, _cynnygiad_; _tyner_, _tirion_: _cynnyg_

Ten-don, _gïewyn_, _gewyn_

Ten-et, _barn_, _tyb_, _egwyddor_

Ten-or, _tueddiad_, _rhediad_

Ten-ure, _daliad_, _gafael_

Ter-race, _uchelrodfa_, _nenrodfa_

Ter-ror, _dychryn_, _braw_, _arswyd_

Tes-tate, _cymynlythyrog_

Teth-er, _tidraff_: _tidraffu_

Text-ure, _pleth_, _gwëad_; _cyfres_

Thank-ful, _diolchgar_

Thaw-ing, _meirioliad_; _meiriol_

The-ist, _gwrthgredwr_, _anghredwr_

Them-selves, _eu hunain_

Thence-forth, _o'r amser hwnw_

There-at, _yno_, _wrtho_, _wrth hyny_

There-by, _trwyddo_, _wrtho_

There-fore, _am hyny_, _gan hyny_

There-from, _oddi yno_, _oddi yna_, _o hyny_

There-in, _yn hyny_, _yn hyn_, _ynddo_

There-of, _o hono_, _o hyn_, _o hyna_

There-on, _arno_, _arni_, _ar hyny_

There-to, _atto_, _atti_, _at hyny_, _i hyny_, _i hyn_

Thick-et, _tewlwyn_, _prysglwyn_

Thick-ness, _tewder_, _ffurfder_

Thim-ble, _gwnïadur_

Think-ing, _meddyliad_, _myfyriad_; _myfyriol_

Thirst-y, _sychedig_

Thir-ty, _deg a'r hugain_, _trideg_

This-tle, _ysgallen_, _ysgellyn_

Thith-er, _hyd yno_

Thor-ough, _cyflawn_, _hollol_, _perffaith_

Thought-ful, _myfyrgar_, _meddylgar_

Thous-and, _mil_, _deg cant_

Thral-dom, _caethiwed_, _caethwasanaeth_

Thrash-er, _dyrnwr_, _ffustiwr_

Thread-bare, _digottwm_, _llwm_, _llom_

Threat-en, _bygylu_, _dondio_, _dwrdio_, _bygwth_

Three-fold, _tridgblyg_, _triphlyg_

Thresh-old, _trothwy_, _hiniog_

Thriv-ing, _cynnyddol_, _prifiannus_

Thros-tle, _y fronfraith_

Throt-tle, _corn y gwynt_, _llindag_: _llindagu_, _tagu_

Through-out, _trwy_, _trwodd_; _yn gwbl oll_, _yn hollol_

Thun-der, _taran_: _taranu_

Thurs-day, _dyd Iau_

Tick-et, _tocyn_, _arwyddnod_: _tocynu_

Tic-kle, _goglais_; _gogleisiol_; _ansafadwy_: _gogleisio_

Ti-dings, _newyddion_; _hanesion_

Ti-dy, _taclus_, _twt_, _cryno_

Ti-ger, _dywalgi_, _tiger_

Tight-en, _tynhau_; _cyfyngu_

Till-age, _amaethiaeth_, _llafurwaith_

Tim-ber, _defnyddgoed_, _coed_

Time-ly, _amserol_, _prydlawn_; _yn amserol_, _mewyn pryd_

Time-piece, _oriadur_

Tim-id, _ofnus_, _ofnog_, _anëon_

Tinc-ture, _lliw_, _arliw_; _trwyth_

Tin-der, _golosged_, _golosg_

Tink-ling, _tinciad_, _tingciad_

Tip-toe, _blaen y fawd_, _pen y fawd_

Tire-some, _blinderus_, _lluddedus_

Tis-sue, _eurblethwe_; _arianbleth_

Ti-tle, _enw_, _enwad_: _enwi_; _rhoi hawl_

Tit-tle, _tip_, _tib_, _tipyn_

Toad-stool, _madalch_, _madarch_

Toi-let, _bwrdd ymdrwsio_

Toil-some, _llafurus_, _trafferthus_

To-ken, _arwydd_, _argoel_: _arwyddo_

Tomb-stone, _beddfaen_, _careg bedd_

Ton-ic, _tonawl_; _hydwyth_, _ardwythol_

Tooth-ache, _deintwst_, _dannodd_

To-phet, _offrymfa_; _uffern_

Top-ic, _testun_, _pwngc_, _pen_

Top-most, _uchaf_, _penaf_, _prif_

Tor-ment, _poen_, _gofid_: _poeni_, _blino_

Tor-rent, _ffrwd_, _ffrydlif_; _ffrwdlifol_

Tor-rid, _poeth_, _crasboeth_

Tor-toise, _crwban_

Tor-ture, _poen_, _penyd_: _poeni_

To-tal, _y cwbl_; _cwbl_, _cyfan_, _llwyr_

Touch-ing, _cynhyrfiol_; _am_, _o ran_, _mewn perthynas_

To-ward, _hydrin_, _hwylus_; _tueddol_

To-wards, _tua_, _tuag at_, _a_, _at_

Tow-el, _llawliain_, _lliain ymsychu_

Tow-er, _twr_, _caerfa_: _ymnoddi_; _esgyn_

Town-clerk, _trefysgrifenydd_

Town-hall, _llysdy tref_

Town-ship, _trefgordd_

Towns-man, _trefwr_, _cyttrefwr_

Track-less, _di-ôl_, _disathr_, _dilwybr_

Trac-tion, _hydyniad_, _estyniad_

Tra-duce, _gwaradwyddo_, _goganu_

Traf-fic, _marchnadaeth_: _masnachu_

Trai-tor, _bradwr_, _bradychwr_

Tram-ple, _mysangu_, _sathru_

Tran-quil, _tawel_, _llonydd_

Trans-act, _trin_, _trefnu_, _gwneuthur_

Tran-scend, _trarhagori_, _blaenori_

Tran-scribe, _adysgrifo_; _adysgrifenu_

Trans-fer, _trosglwyddiad_, _trosiad_: _trosglwyddo_

Trans-fix, _trywanu_, _gwanu_

Trans-form, _dullnewidio_

Trans-gress, _camweddu_, _troseddu_

Tran-sient, _diflanedig_, _ffoawl_

Tran-sit, _trawsfud_, _trawdd_

Trans-late, _cyfieithu_, _trosglwyddo_

Trans-mit, _anfon at_, _trosglwyddo_

Trans-pire, _dynoddi_, _dyfod i glyw_

Trans-plant, _ailblannu_, _adblannu_

Trans-port, _gorawen_; _trosglwyddlong_: _trosglwyddo_, _alltudio_

Trans-pose, _trawsddodi_, _trawsosod_

Trans-verse, _croes_, _traws_

Trap-pings, _seirch_, _addurnau meirch_

Trap-door, _brad-ddrws_, _drws codi_

Trav-ail, _llafur_, _gwewyr esgor_: _trafaelu_, _ymboeni_

Trav-el, _taith_, _ymdaith_; _teithio_

Trav-erse, _cwyn_; _gwrthdro_; _ymgroes_: _trawsymdeithio_

Trea-cle, _triagl_

Trea-son, _brad_, _bradwriaeth_

Treas-ure, _trysor_: _trysori_

Treat-ise, _traethawd_, _traith_

Treat-ment, _triniaeth_, _triniad_

Treat-y, _cynnadledd_, _cytundeb_

Treb-le, _meinllais_; _tridyblyg_: _tridyblygu_

Trel-lis, _delltwaith_, _cledrwaith_

Trem-ble, _crynu_, _arswydu_

Trem-our, _crydiant_; _crynfa_; _dychryn_

Trench-er, _prenddysgl_

Tres-pass, _trosedd_, _camwedd_: _troseddu_

Tri-al, _prawf_, _profiad_, _profedigaeth_

Trib-une, _swyddog Rhufeinig_; _cyssul_

Trib-ute, _teyrnged_, _treth_

Tri-fle, _ychydigyn_: _ofera_, _segura_

Tri-fling, _anoberedd_; _diwerth_, _gwael_

Trig-ger, _ystordyn_; _cloig_; _clicied_

Trim-ming, _addurn_, _trwsiad_

Tri-umph, _gorfoledd_, _buddugoliaeth_: _gorfoleddu_, _buddugoliaethu_

Troop-er, _marchfilwr_, _marchogwr_

Tro-phy, _arwydd buddugoliaeth_

Trop-ic, _trofan_, _trofa_

Troub-le, _blinder_, _gofid_: _blino_, _poeni_

Trow-el, _llwyarn_: _llwyarnu_

Tru-ant, _godechwr_, _llechwr_; _segurllyd_

Tru-ly, _yn wir_, _yn ddiau_, _yn gywir_

Trum-pet, _udgorn_: _udganu_

Trus-tee, _ymddiriedolwr_, _gwarchodwr_

Try-ing, _profedigaethus_

Tues-day, _dydd Mawrth_

Tug-boat, _llusglong_, _llusg-gwch_

Tum-ble, _codwm_: _codymu_

Tu-mid, _chwyddig_, _llawn chwydd_

Tu-mult, _terfysg_: _codi terfysg_, _cynhyrfu_

Tun-nage, _tunelliad_; _tunelldoll_

Tun-nel, _ffynel_; _tryffordd_: _trydyllu_

Tur-ban, _pendorch_, _penamdorch_

Tur-bid, _afloyw_, _cymmysglyd_, _tew_

Turn-ing, _tröad_, _chweliad_; _turniad_

Tur-nip, _erfinen_, _meipen_

Turn-key, _allweddwas_, _cloadydd_

Turn-pike, _ffordd-dollfa_, _tollborth_

Tur-ret, _twr bychan_, _twryn_

Tur-tle, _crwban_

Tu-tor, _ymgeleddwr_, _athraw_: _addysgu_

Twen-ty, _ugain_

Twi-light, _cyflychwyr_, _cyfnos_; _cyfnosawl_

Twin-kle, _amrantiad_; _ysmig_: _ysmician_

Twink-ling, _gwreichioniad_, _amrantiad_

Two-fold, _dauddyblyg_, _dyblyg_

Ty-rant, _gormesdeyrn_, _gorthrymwr_

Ud-der, _piw_, _cader_; _pwrs_

Ug-ly, _hagr_, _gwrthun_, _hyll_

Ul-cer, _gôr_, _gorfa_, _llynoryn_

Um-pire, _dyddiwr_, _canolwr_

Un-apt, _anaddas_; _diawch_, _diaws_

Un-bar, _dadfolltio_, _dadfario_

Un-bend, _dadblygu_

Un-bound, _afrwym_, _dirwym_, _rhydd_

Un-bred, _anhyddysg_, _diddysg_, _difoes_

Un-cle, _ewythr_, _ewythyr_

Un-clean, _aflan_, _budr_, _brwnt_

Unc-tion, _eneiniad_

Un-der, _dan_, _tan_, _oddi tan_, _is_; _tanodd_

Un-do, _dadwneud_; _dattod_; _dyfetha_

Un-done, _dadwneuthuredig_

Un-dress, _amwisg_: _dadwisgo_, _diosg_

Un-fair, _annheg_, _anonest_

Un-fed, _anmhesgedig_

Un-fit, _anghymwys_: _anghymwyso_

Un-fold, _agor_, _egluro_; _dadblygu_

Un-hook, _dadfachu_, _difachu_

U-nit, _un_, _y rhif un_

U-nite, _uno_, _cyduno_, _cydio_

Un-just, _anghyfiawn_, _annheg_

Un-kind, _angharedig_, _annhirion_

Un-known, _anadnabyddus_

Un-less, _oni_, _onid_, _oddi eithr_; _os na_

Un-like, _annhebyg_, _anghyffelyb_

Un-load, _dadlwytho_

Un-lock, _dadgloi_, _agor clo_

Un-loose, _gollwng_, _rhyddhau_

Un-pack, _dadsypynio_

Un-paid, _annhaledig_, _heb ei dalu_

Un-roof, _didoi_, _tynu to_

Un-root, _dadwreiddio_, _diwreiddio_

Un-seen, _anweledig_, _cudd_

Un-sold, _anwerthedig_, _heb ei werthu_

Un-sound, _afiachus_, _llygredig_

Un-tie, _dadglymu_, _datod_

Un-til, _hyd at_, _hyd oni_, _nes_

Un-to, _i_, _at_, _hyd_, _hyd at_, _wrth_

Un-wise, _annoeth_, _anghall_

Un-yoke, _dadieuo_, _di-ieuo_

Up-braid, _dannod_, _edliw_

Up-hold, _dal i fyny_, _cynnal_

Up-most, _uchaf_, _uchelaf_

Up-on, _ar_, _ar uchaf_, _ar warthaf_

Up-per, _uch_, _uwch_

Up-right, _syth_, _uniawn_, _cyfiawn_

Up-roar, _terfysg_, _cynhwrf_

Up-ward, _uwchlaw_; _i fyny_

Ur-chin, _draenog_, _draened_

Ur-gent, _cymhelliadol_, _annogol_

Us-age, _arfer_, _defod_, _arferiad_; _triniaeth_

Us-ance, _llôg_, _ocr_; _gwasanaeth arian_

Use-ful, _gwasanaethgar_, _buddiol_

Use-less, _diddefnydd_, _difudd_

Ush-er, _isddysgawdwr_; _rhingyll_

U-surp, _trawsfeddiannu_, _camoresgyn_

Ut-most, _eithaf_, _pellaf_

Ut-ter, _eithaf_; _hollol_: _yngan_, _adrodd_

Va-cant, _gwag_, _rhydd_; _didrafferth_

Va-cate, _gwaghau_, _ymadael a_

Va-grant, _gwibiad_, _crwydryn_; _crwydraidd_

Val-ance, _cylchedlen gwely_

Val-et, _gweinydd_, _ystafellwas_

Val-iance, _dewredd_, _gwrolder_

Val-iant, _dewr_, _calonog_

Val-ley, _diffryn_, _gwastadedd_

Val-our, _dewrder_, _gwroldeb_

Val-ue, _gwerth_, _pris_: _prisio_; _gwerthfawrogi_

Van-guard, _blaenfyddin_, _blaenres_

Van-ish, _diflanu_, _darfod_

Van-quish, _darostwng_, _gorchfygu_

Va-pour, _tawch_, _tarth_, _ager_: _tarthio_

Var-nish, _adliw_, _claerlyn_: _adlywio_, _dyloywi_

Va-ry, _newid_, _newidiad_: _amrywio_, _newid_; _anghytuno_

Vast-ly, _yn ddirfawr_, _yn orfawr_

Vend-er, _gwerthwr_, _arwerthwr_

Ven-geance, _dial_, _dialedd_

Venge-ful, _dialeddgar_, _dialfawr_

Ven-om, _gwenwyn_

Ven-ture, _antur_, _anturiaeth_: _anturio_

Ve-nus, _Gwener_; _y seren Gwener_

Ver-bal, _parwyddol_, _berfol_; _geiriol_

Ver-dant, _gwyrdd_, _gwyrddlas_

Ver-dict, _dedfryd_, _barn_

Ver-dure, _gwyrddni_, _gwyrddedd_

Ver-mine, _pryf_, _pryfyn_

Ver-nal, _gwanwynol_

Ver-sion, _cyfieithiad_

Ver-tex, _pen uchaf_, _copa_, _top_, _uchedd_

Ver-y, _gwir_, _yr un_; _dros ben_, _tra_, _yn gwbl_, _yn dra_

Ves-sel, _llestr_; _dodrefnyn_: _llestru_

Ves-tige, _ol_, _ol troed_, _olrhe_

Ves-try, _gwisgfa_; _cyfarfod plwyfol_

Ves-ture, _gwisg_, _arwisg_; _dillad_

Vi-al, _costrelan_: _costrelu_

Vi-brate, _crynu_, _crydu_, _ysgwyd_

Vic-ar, _periglor_, _uchberiglor_

Vice-roy, _rhagfrenin_, _rhagdeyrn_

Vi-cious, _drygionus_, _gwydus_

Vic-tim, _aberth_; _ysglyfaeth_

Vict-uals, _lluniaeth_, _bwyd_

Vig-our, _grym_, _nerth_; _egni_

Vil-lage, _pentref_, _maesdref_, _llan_

Vil-lain, _adyn_; _caethddeiliad_; _taëog_

Vine-yard, _gwinllan_

Vin-tage, _casgliad grawnwin_; _gwinaeth_

Vi-per, _gwiber_; _neidr_

Vir-gin, _gwyryf_, _morwyn_; _dihalog_

Vir-tue, _rhin_, _rhinwedd_; _effaith_

Vis-age, _gwyneb_, _gwynebpryd_

Vis-count, _coriarll_, _isiarll_

Vis-ion, _gweledigaeth_, _gweled_

Vis-it, _ymweliad_: _ymweled_

Vi-tal, _bywiol_, _bywydol_

Vi-tals, _bywydolion_, _rhanau bywydol_

Vi-vid, _bywiog_, _llawn byw_, _heinyf_

Vo-cal, _llefarawg_; _lleisiol_, _seiniol_

Vol-ley, _crochruthr_: _taflu allan_, _gollwng allan_

Vol-ume, _claing_, _cyfrol_, _cyflyfr_

Vom-it, _chwyd_, _cyfog_: _chwydu_, _cyfogi_

Vor-tex, _trobwll_, _pwll tro_; _trowynt_

Vouch-er, _prawfysgrif_; _ardystiwr_

Vouch-safe, _teilyngu_, _bod yn wiw_; _cydsynio_

Vow-el, _llafarai_, _llafariad_

Voy-age, _mordaith_: _mordeithio_

Vul-gar, _gwerin_, _y cyffredin_; _cyffredin_; _difoes_, _isel_, _gwael_

Vul-ture, _rheibogydd_, _gwangciedydd_

Wad-ding, _sechddefnydd_, _llacdenlli_

Wad-ing, _rhydiad_; _treiddiad_

Wa-fer, _llethen_, _teisenig_

Wa-ges, _cyflog_, _hur_, _llog_

Wain-scot, _parwydwaith coed_: _parwydfyrddio_

Wait-er, _dysgwyliwr_; _gweitiwr_

Walk-ing, _cerddediad_, _rhodiad_

Wal-let, _ysgrepan_, _cwd deuben_

Wal-low, _ymdreigl_, _ymdro_: _ymdreiglo_

Wal-nut, _cneuen ffreinig_

Wan-der, _crwydro_, _gwibio_

Want-ing, _diffygiol_, _mewn eisiau o_

Wan-ton, _anllad-ddyn_, _anlladferch_: _anlladu_; _anllad_

War-ble, _crychleisio_, _mwynbyngcio_

War-den, _gwarcheidwr_

Ward-robe, _gwisgfa_, _dilladfa_

Ware-house, _ystordy_, _ystorfa_

War-fare, _milwriaeth_: _milwrio_

War-like, _rhyfelgar_, _milwrol_

Warn-ing, _rhybudd_, _rhybuddiad_

War-rant, _gwarant_: _gwarantu_

War-ren, _cwning-gaer_

Wash-ing, _golchiad_; _ymolchiad_

Waste-book, _nodlyfr_, _llawlyfr_

Waste-ful, _afradus_, _gwastraffus_

Watch-ful, _gwyliadwrus_

Watch-ing, _gwyliad_, _gwyliadwriaeth_

Wa-ter, _dwfr_, _dwr_: _dyfrhau_, _dyfrio_

Wat-tles, _tagellau_; _gwiail_

Wav-ing, _chwyfiad_; _bwhwmaniad_

Way-lay, _cynllwyn_, _cynllwyno_

Way-ward, _afrywiog_, _cyndyn_

Weak-en, _gwanhau_, _gwanychu_

Weak-ness, _gwendid_, _llesgedd_

Wealth-y, _cyfoethog_, _goludog_

Wean-ing, _diddyfniad_

Weap-on, _arf_, _erfyn_, _offeryn_

Wea-ry, _diffygiol_, _lluddedig_: _blino_

Wea-sel, _bronwen_, _gwenci_

Weath-er, _tywydd_, _hin_: _dal_; _gwrthsefyll_

Weav-ing, _gwead_, _gweuad_

Wed-ding, _priodas_; _neithior_

Week-ly, _wythnosol_

Weight-y, _pwysfawr_, _trwm_

Wel-come, _croesaw_; _croesawedig_: _croesawu_

Wel-fare, _llwydd_, _llwyddiant_; _iechyd_; _lles_

Well-done, _da_, _da iawn_, _puriawn_

Welsh-man, _Cymro_, _Brython_

West-ward, _tu a'r gorllewin_, _i'r gorllewin_

Weth-er, _mollt_, _llwdn dafad_

Where-as, _can_, _gan_; _cyd_

Where-at, _wrth yr hyn_

Where-by, _trwy yr hyn_

Where-fore, _am ba achos_, _paham_, _o herwydd_

Where-of, _o'r hyn_, _o ba beth_

Where-in, _yn yr hyn_, _yn yr hwn_

Where-on, _ar yr hyn_, _ar hyny_, _ar ba beth_

Where-to, _i ba le_

Where-with, _a'r hyn_, _a pha beth_, _gyda'r hyn_; _trwy yr hyn_

Wheth-er, _pa un_, _pa un ai_

Whet-stone, _hogal_, _hogalen_

Whet-ting, _hogiad_, _awchlymiad_

Whirl-pool, _llyn tro_, _pwll tro_

Whirl-wind, _trowynt_, _corwynt_

Whis-per, _sygan_, _sibrwd_: _sisialu_

Whis-tle, _chwib_, _chwibanogl_: _chwibanu_

White-ness, _can_, _gwyndra_

White-wash, _gwyngalch_: _gwyngalchu_

Whith-er, _i ba le_, _i ba fan_

Whole-sale, _cyfanwerth_; _cyfanwerthol_

Whole-some, _iach_, _iachus_

Whol-ly, _yn hollol_, _yn gwbl_

Whore-dom, _puteindra_

Wick-ed, _drwg_, _drygionus_

Wid-ow, _gweddw_; _unig_

Wild-ness, _gwylltineb_; _gorphwyll_

Wil-ful, _gwirfoddol_, _bwriadol_

Will-ing, _ewyllysiad_; _ewyllysgar_

Wil-low, _helygen_

Wind-bound, _caeth gan wynt_

Wind-lass, _dyrwynlath_

Win-dow, _ffenestr_, _alches_

Win-now, _nithio_, _gwyntyllio_

Win-ter, _gauaf_: _gauafu_

Wis-dom, _doethineb_, _callineb_

Wise-ly, _yn ddoeth_, _yn synwyrol_

Witch-craft, _dewiniaeth_

With-al, _hefyd_, _heblaw hyny_

With-draw, _cilio_, _encilio_, _neillduo_, _tynu yn ol_

With-er, _gwywo_, _crino_

With-hold, _attal_, _dal_, _rhwystro_

With-in, _oddi fewn_, _ofewn_

With-out, _heb_; _oddi eithr_; _tu allan_

With-stand, _gwrthsefyll_, _gwrthwynebu_

Wit-ness, _tyst_, _tystiolaeth_: _tystio_

Wit-ty, _synwyrol_, _ffraeth_

Wiz-ard, _cynghallen_, _dewin_

Wo-ful, _gofidus_, _gresynol_

Wom-an, _gwraig_, _benyw_

Won-der, _rhyfeddod_, _syndod_: _rhyfeddu_, _synu_

Wood-bine, _gwyddfid_

Wood-cock, _cyffylog_

Wood-en, _coedawl_, _o bren_

Wood-y, _coedog_, _llawn coed_

Word-ing, _geiriad_

Work-house, _gweithdy_

Work-man, _gweithiwr_, _gweithydd_

World-ly, _bydol_, _bydgarol_

Wor-ship, _iolaeth_, _addoliad_: _ioli_, _addoli_

Wor-thy, _teilwng_; _gwiw_, _addas_

Wound-ed, _archolledig_, _briwedig_

Wound-ing, _archolliad_, _clwyfiad_

Wran-gle, _cecri_, _ymgecru_: _cecru_

Wrap-per, _amdrws_, _amdwyg_

Wres-tle, _ymaflyd_, _ymafael_

Wretch-ed, _truan_, _gresynus_

Wrin-kle, _crych_: _crychu_

Writ-ing, _ysgrifen_, _ysgrifeniad_

Writ-ten, _ysgrifenedig_

Year-ling, _blwyddiad_, _llwdn blwydd_

Year-ly, _blwyddol_; _yn flynyddol_

Yel-low, _melyn_

Yeo-man, _rhydd-ddeiliad_; _gosgorddwr_

Yield-ing, _yn dwyn_; _yn caniatau_

Young-ster, _ieuangyn_, _llencyn_

Your-self, _eich hun_, _eich hunan_

Your-selves, _eich hunain_, _chwychwi_

Zeal-ous, _aiddgar_, _eiddigeddus_, _gwresog_

Zen-ith, _uwchben_, _entrych nen_

Zig-zag, _igam ogam_




WORDS OF THREE SYLLABLES.



A-ban-don, _gadael_; _gwrthod_, _rhoi i fyny_

A-base-ment, _gostyngiad_; _iseliad_

A-bate-ment, _lleihâd_, _toliant_; _cwymp_

Ab-di-cate, _gadu_, _gwrthod_; _rhoi i fyny_

A-bet-tor, _annogwr_, _cynneilydd_

Ab-hor-rence, _ffieiddiad_; _casineb_, _atgasrwydd_

Ab-hor-rent, _ffiaidd_, _cas_; _atgas_

A-bol-ish, _dirymu_; _diddymu_, _dilëu_

A-bound-ing, _llawnder_, _amledd_, _digonedd_

A-bridge-ment, _talfyriad_, _byrhâd_; _crynodeb_

Ab-ro-gate, _diddymu_, _dilëu_; _dirymu_

Ab-rupt-ly, _yn fyrbwyll_; _yn sydyn_

Ab-sen-tee, _absennolwr_; _ymabsennolwr_

Ab-so-lute, _arbenig_; _hollol_, _cwbl_

Ab-sti-nence, _ymattaliad_, _ymarbediad_

Ab-sti-nent, _ymattaliol_, _ymwrthodol_

Ab-stract-ed, _dansoddedig_; _neillduedig_

A-bun-dance, _helaethrwdd_, _llawnder_, _amledd_

A-bun-dant, _helaeth_; _llawn_; _toreithiog_

A-bu-sive, _difrïol_, _sarhäus_, _trahäus_

Ac-cept-ance, _derbyniad_; _croesaw_; _addefeb_

Ac-ci-dence, _rhagieithadur_; _egwyddoreg_

Ac-ci-dent, _damwain_, _dygwydd_; _hap_

Ac-com-plice, _cyfranogwr_, _rhanogydd_

Ac-com-plish, _cyflawni_, _cwblhau_; _gwneuthur_

Ac-cord-ance, _cydfod_, _cydweddiad_

Ac-cord-ant, _cytunol_, _unweddol_; _cyfatebol_

Ac-cord-ing, _yn ol_; _yn gyffelyb_; _megis_, _fel_

Ac-count-ant, _cyfrifwr_, _cyfrifydd_

Ac-cu-rate, _cywir_; _cywraint_; _manwl_

Ac-cus-tom, _arfer_, _arferu_; _ymarfer_

A-chieve-ment, _cyflawniad_; _gorchest_

Ac-know-ledge, _cydnabod_; _cyfaddef_

Ac-quaint-ance, _cydnabyddiaeth_; _cydnabod_, _cyfaill_

Ac-quaint-ed, _cydnabyddus_; _cynnefin_

Ac-qui-esce, _ymfoddloni_;  _cydsynio_, _ymostwng_

Ac-quire-ment, _cyrhaeddiad_; _ymgais_

Ac-quit-tance, _gollyngdod_; _derbyneb_

Ac-tive-ly, _yn weithredol_; _yn fywiog_

Ac-tu-al, _gweithredol_; _gwir_

A-cute-ly, _yn llymacenol_: _yn llym_

Ad-dict-ed, _ymroddedig_; _chwannog_

Ad-di-tion, _chwanegiad_; _cynnodiaeth_

Ad-e-quate, _cyfartal_; _digonol_: _gordebygu_

Ad-her-ent, _ymlynwr_, _dylynwr_; _ymlynol_

Ad-he-sion, _ymlyniad_, _glyniad_; _undeb_

Ad-he-sive, _ymlynol_; _gludiol_

Ad-ja-cent, _agos_, _cyffiniol_, _ger llaw_

Ad-jec-tive, _ansoddair_, _adenw_

Ad-join-ing, _wrth_, _yn ymyl_; _yn cydio_

Ad-journ-ment, _addoediad_, _gohiriad_

Ad-just-ing, _trefniad_, _addasiad_

Ad-mi-ral, _llyngesor_, _llyngesydd_

Ad-mis-sion, _derbyniad_; _goddefiad_; _caniatâd_

Ad-mit-tance, _derbyniad_; _goddefiad_; _addefiad_

Ad-mon-ish, _rhybuddio_; _cynghori_; _ceryddu_

A-dop-tion, _mabwysiad_; _dewisiad_

Ad-vance-ment, _cychwyniad_; _dyrchafiad_

Ad-van-tage, _budd_, _mantais_; _ennill_; _goruchafiaeth_: _buddioli_,
_manteisio_

Ad-ven-ture, _antur_; _beiddiad_: _anturio_; _beiddio_

Ad-ver-tise, _hysbysu_, _cyhoeddi_, _amlygu_

Ad-vo-cate, _dadleuwr_; _amddiffynwr_; _eiriolwr_: _dadleu_; _amddiffyn_

Af-fa-ble, _mwyn_, _hynaws_, _mwynaidd_

Af-fec-tion, _serch_; _hoffedd_, _anwyldeb_

Af-fi-ance, _ymddiried_; _ymddiried_, _hyderu_

Af-flic-tion, _cystudd_, _adfyd_; _gorthrymder_

Af-flu-ence, _llawnder_, _llawndid_, _amledd_

Af-flu-ent, _llawn_, _gorlawn_; _cyfoethog_

A-fore-hand, _ym mlaen llaw_

A-fore-said, _rhagddywededig_, _crybwylledig_

Af-ter-noon, _prydnawn_, _prynawn_

Af-ter-ward,  Af-ter-wards, _gwedi_, _wedi_, _wedi hyny_; _ar ôl hyny_

Ag-gran-dize, _dyrchafu_, _anrhydeddu_

Ag-gra-vate, _mwyhau_; _gwaethygu_; _blino_

Ag-gre-gate, _cynnulliad_; _cyf-fanswm_: _cynnull_, _crynhoi_

Ag-gres-sion, _cynhen_; _cynymrafael_

Ag-i-tate, _cynhyrfu_; _terfysgu_

Ag-o-ny, _dirboen_, _ing_; _gorymdrech_

A-gree-ment, _undeb_, _cytundeb_; _ammod_

A-larm-ing, _alarmus_; _arswydus_

Al-der-man, _henadur_; _ynad_

Al-ge-bra, _alsoddeg_, _alsawdd_

Al-ien-ate, _estronoli_, _trosglwyddo_; _cilio_

Al-i-ment, _maeth_, _lluniaeth_, _ymborth_

Al-i-quot, _cydrifol_, _cyfnifer_

Al-le-giance, _gwarogaeth_, _teyrngarwch_

Al-li-ance, _cyfathrach_; _cydbleidiaeth_

Al-lot-ment, _cyfran_, _darn_, _dyraniad_

Al-low-ance, _caniatâd_; _addefiad_; _lleihâd_

Al-lu-sion, _cyfeiriad_, _crybwylliad_

Al-migh-ty, _yr Hollalluog_; _ollalluog_

Al-pha-bet, _egwyddor_; _y llythrenau_

Al-read-y, _eisoes_; _yn barod_, _hyd yn hyn_

Al-ter-nate, _cylchynol_: _cylchnewid_

Al-ti-tude, _uchder_, _uchelder_

Am-bi-tion, _uchelgais_, _uchelfryd_

Am-bi-tious, _uchelgeisiol_, _uchelfrydig_

Am-bus-cade, _cynllwyn_, _llechfa_: _cadlechu_

A-mend-ment, _cyweiriad_; _gwelliant_

Am-nes-ty, _ebargofraith_, _tellwedd_

Am-pli-tude, _helaethrwydd_, _eangder_

Am-pu-tate, _amdori_, _tori aelod_

A-muse-ment, _difyrwch_, _digrifwch_

An-a-lyse, _dosranu_; _dosbarthu_

An-ar-chy, _aflywodraeth_; _terfysg_

An-ces-tors, _hynafiaid_; _cyndadau_

An-chor-age, _angorfa_, _angordraeth_

An-ec-dote, _hanesyn_, _cofhanesyn_

An-gu-lar, _onglog_, _conglog_

An-i-mal, _anifel_, _anifail_; _anifeilig_

An-i-mate, _byw_, _bywiog_: _bywhau_; _cefnogi_

An-noy-ance, _blinder_, _aflonyddwch_

An-nu-al, _blwyddiadur_; _blynyddol_

An-nu-lar, _modrwyol_, _cylchol_

An-oth-er, _arall_, _all_; _un arall_

An-ti-christ, _anghrist_, _gwrthgrist_

An-ti-dote, _gwrthwenwyn_, _dadwenwyn_

A-part-ment, _rhandy_, _ystafell_

Ap-a-thy, _annheimlad_; _difaterwch_

Ap-er-ture, _agoriad_, _adwy_, _bwlch_

A-pos-tate, _gwrthgiliwr_; _gwrthgiliol_

A-pos-tle, _apostol_; _anfonog_

Ap-pa-rel, _dillad_, _gwisg_: _dilladu_, _gwisgo_

Ap-pa-rent, _amlwg_, _eglur_; _ymddangosiadol_

Ap-pear-ance, _ymddangosiad_, _golwg_; _gweledigaeth_

Ap-pend-age, _dibynai_; _attodiad_, _chwanegiad_

Ap-pen-dix, _attodiad_, _ychwanegiad_

Ap-per-tain, _perthyn_, _perthynu_

Ap-pe-tite, _chwant_, _gwangc_, _chwant bwyd_

Ap-point-ment, _penodiad_, _gosodiad_; _ammod_

Ap-prais-er, _prisiwr_, _prisiedydd_

Ap-pre-hend, _amgyffred_, _dirnad_; _tybio_

Ap-prov-al, _cymmeradwyaeth_; _tystiad_

A-quat-ic, _dyfrol_, _dyfrog_

Aq-ue-duct, _awell_; _gwyffos_, _dyfrffos_

Ar-a-ble, _arodol_; _arddadwy_

Ar-bi-ter, _canolwr_; _barnydd_

Arch-an-gel, _archangel_

Arch-bish-op, _archesgob_

Ar-chi-tect, _adeiladydd_, _pensaer_; _saer_

Ar-den-cy, _angerdd_; _gwres_; _taerni_

Ar-du-ous, _dyrys_, _anhawdd_; _caled_

Ar-gu-ment, _rheswm_, _dadl_; _testyn_

Ar-mo-ry, _arfdy_; _rhyfelwisg_; _pais arfau_

Ar-range-ment, _trefniad_; _rhestriad_

Ar-ro-gance, _traha_, _hunandyb_; _rhyfyg_

Ar-ro-gant, _trahaus_, _amryfus_, _hunanol_

Ar-se-nal, _arfdy_, _ystordy arfau_

Ar-te-ry, _rhedweli_, _arwythen_

Ar-ti-cle, _erthygl_; _bannod_: _bannodi_

Ar-ti-fice, _cyfrwyswaith_, _dichell_, _ystryw_

As-cen-sion, _esgyniad_, _dyrchafiad_

As-cer-tain, _gwirio_, _sicrhau_; _sefydlu_

As-pi-rate, _chwernsain_: _chwernseinio_

As-sas-sin, _murnwr_; _bradlofrudd_

As-sem-ble, _cynnull_, _casglu_; _ymgynnull_

As-sem-bly, _cynnullfa_, _cynnulleidfa_

As-ser-tion, _honiad_, _haeriad_, _cadarnhâd_

As-sess-ment, _trethiad_; _ardrethiad_

As-sign-ee, _daerodydd_, _dirprwywr_

As-sign-ment, _daerodiad_, _trosglwyddiad_

As-sist-ance, _cynnorthwy_, _cymhorth_

As-sist-ant, _cynnorthwywr_; _cynnorthwyol_

As-sort-ment, _cymmmathiad_; _pigion_

As-sump-tion, _cymmeriant_; _rhyfyg_

As-sur-ance, _dilysrwydd_, _sicrwydd_; _hyder_

As-ter-isk, _serenig_ (*)

As-ton-ish, _synu_, _brawychu_; _rhyfeddu_

A-sun-der, _o'r neilldu_, _ar wahan_

A-sy-lum, _noddfa_, _achlesfa_

A-the-ist, _annuwiad_, _atheist_

At-mo-sphere, _awyrgylch_; _wybren_

A-tone-ment, _iawn_; _cymmod_

At-tach-ment, _gafaeliad_; _ymlyniad_

At-tain-ment, _cyrhaeddiad_, _caffaeliad_; _dysg_

At-tend-ance, _gweinyddiad_, _gwasanaeth_; _gosgordd_

At-tend-ant, _cydymaith_; _gwas_; _dilynol_

At-ten-tion, _ystyriaeth_; _gwrandawiad_

At-ten-tive, _ystyriol_; _ymwrandawgar_

At-ti-tude, _ystum_, _agwedd_

At-tor-ney, _attyrnai_, _cyfreithiwr_

At-trac-tion, _attyniad_, _tyniad_

At-trib-ute, _priodoledd_: _priodoli_; _cyfrif_

Auc-tion-eer, _arwerthydd_, _arwerthwr_

Au-da-cious, _hyf_; _haerllug_; _rhyfygus_

Au-di-ble, _hyglyw_; _llafar_, _croyw_

Au-di-tor, _clywiadur_; _prawiadur_

Au-di-ence, _clyw_; _gwrandawyr_

Au-then-tic, _awduredig_; _credadwy_

Au-thor-ize, _awdurdodi_, _cefnogi_

Av-a-rice, _cybydd-dod_, _trachwant_

Av-e-nue, _dyfodfa_, _cyntedd_; _rhodfa_

Av-er-age, _cyfartaledd_; _canolrif_; _cyfartal_, _canolaidd_: _cyfartalu_,
_canoli_

A-ver-sion, _gwrthwyneb_; _casineb_

Aw-ful-ness, _arswydoldeb_; _uthredd_

Bach-e-lor, _anweddog_; _gwryf_

Back-slid-ing, _gwrthgiliad_; _gwrthgiliol_

Bal-co-ny, _balcawd_, _murdalffen_

Ban-dit-ti, _ysbeilwyr_, _ysbeildorf_

Ban-ish-ment, _alltudiaeth_; _deoliad_

Bar-ba-rism, _barbariaith_; _annysg_, _anfoes_

Bar-ba-rous, _barbaraidd_; _difoes_

Bar-ren-ness, _anffrwythlondeb_; _diepiledd_

Bar-ri-cade, _brysgaer_; _attalgaer_: _attalgau_

Bar-ri-er, _attalgaer_; _terfyn_

Bar-ris-ter, _dadleuydd_, _bargyfreithiwr_

Bat-tal-ion, _cadfyddin_, _cadfagad_

Bat-ter-y, _magnelfa_, _hyrddglawdd_

Bat-tle-ment, _canllaw_; _murganllaw_

Bay-o-net, _gwnfidog_, _bidog_

Beau-ti-ful, _teg_, _prydferth_, _hardd_, _tlws_

Be-com-ing, _gweddus_, _cymhwys_, _hardd_

Bed-cham-ber, _ystafell wely_, _cysgell_

Be-gin-ning, _dechreuad_; _cychwyniad_; _pen_

Be-hav-iour, _ymddygiad_, _ymarweddiad_, _moes_

Be-liev-er, _credadyn_, _crediniwr_

Ben-e-fice, _glwysfudd_, _bywoliaeth eglwysig_

Ben-e-fit, _budd_, _lles_; _ennill_: _buddio_; _manteisio_

Bev-er-age, _diod_, _diodlyn_; _diodrodd_

Big-a-my, _dwyweddogaeth_, _dwywreiciaeth_

Bi-sec-tion, _deubarthiad_, _rhaniad_

Bis-sex-tile, _blwyddyn naid_

Bit-ter-ness, _chwerwedd_; _bustledd_

Bit-u-men, _duglist_, _daiarbyg_

Black-ber-ry, _mwyaren_, _mwyaren ddu_

Blas-phe-my, _cabledd_; _difenwad_

Blus-ter-ous, _dadyrddus_, _trystfawr_

Bod-i-ly, _corfforol_; _yn gorfforol_

Bois-ter-ous, _tymmestlog_, _ystormus_

Bom-bard-ment, _llosbelgyrch_, _llosgbeliad_

Bot-a-ny, _llysieuaeth_, _planigaeth_

Bot-tom-less, _diwaelod_

Bound-a-ry, _terfyn_, _cyffinedd_, _ffinfa_

Boun-ti-ful, _hael_, _haelionus_, _elusenol_

Brav-er-y, _dewredd_, _gwroldeb_, _calondid_

Broth-er-hood, _brawdoliaeth_; _cymdeithas_

Broth-er-ly, _brawdol_, _serchog_; _yn frawdol_

Bull-rush-es, _llafrwyn_, _corsfrwyn_

Bur-den-some, _trwm_, _pwysfawr_, _beichus_

Burg-la-ry, _tydoriad_, _toriad ty_

Bur-i-al, _angladd_, _claddedigaeth_, _cynhebrwng_

But-ter-fly, _ilir_, _gloywyn byw_

But-ter-milk, _llaeth enwyn_, _enwyn_

Cab-i-net, _cafell_; _y cyfrin-gynghor_: _amgau_

Cal-cu-late, _cyfrif_, _rhifo_; _olrhain_; _amcanu_

Cal-en-dar, _blwyddiadur_; _coflyfr_: _coflyfru_

Cal-um-ny, _camgyhuddiad_, _athrod_

Can-di-date, _ymgeisiwr_, _cystadleuydd_

Can-dle-stick, _canwyllbren_, _goleusaf_

Can-non-ade, _cyflegriad_: _cyflegru_

Ca-pa-ble, _galluog_; _medrus_; _deallus_

Ca-pa-cious, _cynnwysfawr_, _helaeth_, _eang_

Cap-i-tal, _argyffre_, _cynsawdd_; _ariansawdd_; _priflythyren_; _prif_;
_rhagorol_

Cap-i-tol, _y Capitol_; _cabidwl_; _llywotty_

Ca-pri-cious, _mympwyol_, _anwadal_

Cap-ti-vate, _caethgludedig_: _caethiwo_; _darostwng_

Car-a-van, _teithlu_, _myntai_; _cludfen_

Car-di-nal, _cyniadur_, _prifor_; _prif_, _penaf_

Car-pen-ter, _saer_, _pensaer coedsaer_

Car-ti-lage, _madruddyn_, _madrudd_

Cas-u-al, _damweiniol_, _dygwyddol_

Cat-a-comb, _beddogof_, _claddogof_

Cat-a-logue, _cofres_, _mynegfa_: _cofrestru_

Cat-a-ract, _rhaiadr_, _dyfrgwymp_

Cat-e-chise, _egwyddori_, _holwyddori_

Cat-e-chism, _holwyddoreg_, _egwyddoreg_

Ca-the-dral, _eglwys gadeiriol_, _esgoblan_

Cath-o-lic, _pabydd_; _cyffredinol_; _haelfrydig_

Cav-al-ry, _marchlu_, _marchfyddin_, _marchfilwyr_

Cav-i-ty, _ceuedd_, _ceudwll_; _pant_

Cel-e-brate, _dathlu_, _clodfori_; _cadw_, _cynnal_

Ce-les-tial, _nefolydd_; _nefol_, _nefolaidd_

Cen-tu-ry, _canrif_, _canmlwydd_

Cer-tain-ty, _sicrwydd_, _diamheuadd_

Cer-ti-fy, _sicrhau_, _ardystio_; _gwirio_

Cham-ber-lain, _ystafellydd_, _ystafellwas_

Cham-ber-maid, _ystafellyddes_, _morwyn ystafell_

Cham-pi-on, _campwr_; _ymdrechwr_; _gwron_

Chan-cel-lor, _canghellydd_, _canghellor_

Chan-cer-y, _canghellys_; _llys cydwybod_

Change-a-ble, _newidiol_, _cyfnewidiol_

Char-ac-ter, _nodweddiad_, _cymmeriad_; _arwydd_: _darlunio_, _dysgrifio_;
_cerfio_

Charge-a-ble, _gofynadwy_; _cyhuddadwy_; _costus_

Char-i-ot, _cerbyd_; _carrod_

Char-i-ty, _cariad_, _elusen_; _ewyllys da_

Chas-tise-ment, _cerydd_, _cospedigaeth_

Chas-ti-ty, _diweirdeb_, _dihalogrwydd_

Chiv-al-ry, _marchofyddiaeth_; _gwroniaeth_

Chron-i-cle, _brut_, _cronicl_, _oeslyfr_: _brutio_, _coflyfru_, _hanesu_

Cir-cu-lar, _cylchlythyr_; _cylchol_, _cynghrwn_

Cir-cu-late, _amlifo_; _cylchlifo_; _gwasgaru_

Cir-cum-cise, _enwaedu_; _blaendori_

Cir-cum-flex, _hirnod_, _hiracen_

Cir-cum-scribe, _amgau_, _cylchynu_; _amlinellu_

Cir-cum-spect, _amwel_; _gochelgar_; _gofalus_; _ystyriol_

Cir-cum-stance, _amgylchiad_; _dygwyddiad_; _sefyllfa_; _amgylchiadu_;
_damweinio_

Cit-a-del, _castell_, _amddiffynfa_, _tŵr_

Ci-ta-tion, _cerydd_; _dyfyneb_; _crybwylliad_

Cit-i-zen, _dinesydd_; _trefwr_

Civ-il-ize, _gwareiddio_, _moesoli_

Clam-or-ous, _dadyrddus_, _trystfawr_

Clan-des-tine, _cuddiedig_, _lladradaidd_

Clar-i-fy, _teru_, _gloywi_, _puro_

Clas-si-fy, _dosbarthu_, _trefnu_

Clean-li-ness, _glendid_, _glanweithdra_

Clem-en-cy, _hynawsedd_, _tiriondeb_, _tosturi_

Cler-gy-man, _offeiriad_, _gwr llên_, _clerigwr_

Co-e-qual, _gogystal_, _cyfartal_, _cydradd_

Co-hab-it, _cyttrigo_, _cydfyw_, _cydanneddu_

Co-her-ence, _cydlyniad_; _cyssylltiad_

Co-her-ent, _cydlynol_; _cyssylltedig_

Co-he-sion, _cydlyniad_, _glyniad_

Co-in-cide, _cyttaro_; _cytuno_; _ymgyfarfod_

Col-lec-tion, _casgliad_, _cynnulliad_; _detholiad_

Col-lec-tive, _cynnulliadol_, _cryno_

Col-lect-or, _casglwr_; _cyllidydd_

Col-li-sion, _gwrthdarawiad_; _cyferbyniad_

Col-lo-quy, _ymddyddan_, _siarad_, _llafar gwlad_

Col-o-ny, _trefedigaeth_; _trefedigion_

Com-bus-tion, _cydlosgiad_, _ennyniad_

Come-li-ness, _gweddusder_, _prydferthwch_

Com-fort-er, _cysurwr_, _dyddanydd_

Com-mand-er, _penaeth_, _llywydd_, _blaenor_

Com-mand-ment, _gorchymmyn_, _arch_; _awdurdod_

Com-mence-ment, _dechreuad_; _cychwyniad_

Com-mer-cial, _masnachol_, _trafnidiol_

Com-mis-sion, _gwneuthuriad_; _swyddogaeth_; _gorchymmyn_: _awdurdodi_;
_swyddogi_

Com-mit-ment, _gwneuthuriad_; _traddodiad_

Com-mit-tee, _pwyllgor_; _cyfeisteddiad_

Com-mo-dore, _morlyw_, _morlywydd_

Com-mon-ly, _yn gyffredin_; _gan amlaf_

Com-mon-wealth, _gwladwriaeth_; _gwerinlywodraeth_

Com-mo-tion, _cyffro_, _terfysg_, _aflonyddwch_

Com-mu-nion, _cymmundeb_; _cymdeithas_

Com-pan-ion, _cydymaith_, _cydweinydd_

Com-pa-ny, _cymdeithas_; _cymdeithion_: _cymdeithio_; _cyfrinachu_

Com-pas-sion, _tosturi_, _trugaredd_; _cydymdeimlad_

Com-pen-sate, _talu_, _ad-dalu_; _gwobrwyo_

Com-pe-tent, _digonol_, _cymhwys_, _addas_

Com-ple-ment, _cyflanw_; _cyflawniad_; _llawnrif_

Com-plex-ion, _gwedd_, _gwynebpryd_

Com-pli-ance, _cydsyniad_, _ymostyngiad_

Com-pli-cate, _cymhleth_: _cymhlethu_; _cymmysgu_

Com-pli-ment, _moesair_; _cyfarchiad_: _canmawl_, _cyfarch_

Com-po-nent, _elfen_, _cyfansoddai_; _cyfansoddol_

Com-pos-ite, _cyfansawdd_, _cymmysg_

Com-pos-ure, _tawelwch_, _llonyddwch_; _trefn_

Com-pre-hend, _cynnwys_; _amgyffred_, _deall_

Com-pres-sion, _cydwasgiad_, _amwasgiad_

Com-pro-mise, _cyfaddawd_, _cytundeb_: _cyfaddaw_; _ymgytuno â_

Com-pul-sion, _gorfod_, _gorfodaeth_, _cymhelliad_

Com-pul-sive, _gorfodol_, _dirgymhellol_

Con-ceal-ment, _celedigaeth_: _cuddfa_

Con-ceit-ed, _hunandybus_, _gwagfalch_

Con-cen-trate, _cymherfeddu_, _canolbwyntio_

Con-cep-tion, _ymgael_, _beichiogi_; _deall_

Con-cern-ing, _am_, _yng nghylch_, _o ran_, _o herwydd_: _mewn perthynas i_

Con-cise-ly, _yn fyr_, _yn gryno_; _ar air_

Con-clu-sion, _terfyn_, _diwedd_; _diweddglo_; _casgliad_

Con-clu-sive, _penderfynol_; _casgladwy_

Con-cord-ance, _cytundeb_; _mynegiadur_

Con-cu-bine, _gordderch_, _gordderchwraig_

Con-cur-rence, _cytundeb_; _cydymgyrch_

Con-cur-rent, _cyfred_, _cydred_; _cydredol_

Con-cus-sion, _ysgydwad_, _cyttrawiad_

Con-de-scend, _ymostwng_; _teilyngu_

Con-di-tion, _cyflwr_, _helynt_; _ammod_: _ammodi_; _cytuno_

Con-du-cive, _tueddol_, _llesol_, _gwasanaethgar_

Con-duct-or, _arweinydd_; _llywydd_

Con-fer-ence, _cynnadledd_; _ymgynghoriad_

Con-fes-sion, _cyffes_, _addefiad_; _proffes_

Con-fi-dence, _hyder_, _ymddiried_; _cred_

Con-fi-dent, _cyfrinachydd_; _hyderus_; _hyf_

Con-fine-ment, _attaliad_; _carchariad_; _gwelyfod_

Con-fis-cate, _attafaeledig_: _attafaelu_, _fforffetu_

Con-flu-ence, _cymmer_, _cydlif_; _cydffrydiad_

Con-flu-ent, _cydlifol_, _aberol_, _cydlifeiriol_

Con-fu-sion, _cymmysgedd_; _terfysg_

Con-gre-gate, _cynnull_, _crynhoi_; _ymdyru_

Con-jec-ture, _amcan_, _tyb_: _tybio_, _amcanu_

Con-ju-gal, _priodasol_; _cydieuog_

Con-ju-gate, _cyfieuair_: _cyfieuo_; _treiglo_

Con-junc-tion, _cyssylltiad_; _cyssylltair_

Con-nec-tion, _cyssylltiad_, _cydiad_; _perthynas_

Con-quer-or, _gorchfygwr_, _buddugoliaethwr_

Con-se-crate, _cyssegru_; _santeiddio_

Con-se-quence, _canlyniad_; _effaith_; _pwys_

Con-se-quent, _canlyniad_; _canlynol_

Con-sid-er, _ystyried_, _meddwl_; _myfyrio_

Con-sign-ment, _trosiad_; _trosglwyddeb_

Con-sist-ence, _tewdra_, _sylwedd_; _cyfansoddiad_

Con-sist-ent, _cysson_, _cytunol_, _cydweddol_

Con-so-nant, _cydsain_; _cydseiniol_

Con-sta-ble, _heddwas_; _penceidwad_

Con-stan-cy, _gwastadrwydd_, _dianwadalwch_

Con-sti-tute, _gosod_; _cyfansoddi_; _sefydlu_

Con-struc-tion, _adail_; _cyfansoddiad_; _cystrawen_

Con-sump-tion, _traul_; _darfodedigaeth_

Con-ta-gious, _heintus_; _adwythig_

Con-tem-plate, _myfyrio_, _ymsynied_; _bwriadu_

Con-tend-ing, _ymryson_; _gwrthwynebol_

Con-ten-tion, _ymryson_, _ymrafael_, _anghydfod_

Con-ten-tious, _ymrysongar_, _amrafaelgar_

Con-tent-ment, _boddlonrwydd_, _boddhâd_

Con-ti-nence, _diweirdeb_; _ymattal_

Con-ti-nent, _cyfandir_; _diwair_

Con-tin-ue, _parhau_; _sefyll_; _oedi_

Con-tra-band, _gwaharddiad_; _gwaharddedig_

Con-tract-ed, _talfyr_; _cyfyng_; _ammodedig_

Con-trac-tion, _crybychiad_; _talfyriad_; _crynodeb_

Con-tra-dict, _gwrthddywedyd_; _gwrthwynebu_

Con-tra-ry, _y gwrthwyneb_; _gwrthwynebus_

Con-trib-ute, _cyfranu_; _cynnorthwyo_; _llesäu_

Con-triv-ance, _dyfais_, _dychymmyg_; _cyfrwysder_

Con-tro-vert, _dadleu_; _gwrthddadlu_

Con-tu-sion, _pwyad_; _yssigiad_; _maluriad_

Con-ven-tion, _eisteddfod_, _cymmanfa_; _undeb_

Con-vers-ant, _cynnefin_, _cyfarwydd_

Con-ver-sion, _troad_, _troëdigaeth_; _cyfnewidiad_

Con-vey-ance, _cludiad_, _trosglwyddiad_, _gweithred tir_

Con-vic-tion, _argyhoeddiad_; _dyfarniad_

Con-vul-sion, _dirdyniad_; _dirgynhwrf_

Con-vul-sive, _dirdynol_; _dirgrynol_

Co-pi-ous, _helaeth_, _llawn_; _cynnwysfawr_

Cop-u-late, _cydio_, _ymgydio_; _cymharu_

Cor-di-al, _sirgyffyr_, _cysurlyn_; _calonog_; _serchog_; _gwresog_;
_adfywiol_

Cor-mo-rant, _morfran_, _mulfran_

Cor-o-ner, _trengholwr_; _crwner_

Cor-po-ral, _dengwriad_; _corfforol_; _defnyddiol_

Cor-po-rate, _corfforedig_; _cyffredinol_

Cor-pu-lence, _corffogrwydd_, _tewder_

Cor-pu-lent, _corffog_, _tew_, _cigog_

Cor-rec-tion, _cyweiriad_, _gwelliant_; _cerydd_

Cor-rect-ly, _yn gywir_; _yn fanwl_

Cor-re-spond, _cyfateb_; _gohebu_

Cor-rup-tion, _llygredigaeth_, _halogrwydd_; _gôr_

Coun-sel-lor, _cynghorwr_, _dadleuwr_

Coun-te-nance, _gwyneb_, _gwynepryd_: _cefnogi_

Coun-ter-act, _gwrthweithredu_; _gwrthsefyll_

Coun-ter-feit, _ffugiwr_; _ffugiol_: _ffugio_

Coun-ter-pane, _torsed_, _cwrlid_, _huling_

Cour-a-geous, _dewr_, _gwrol_, _calonog_

Cou-ri-er, _brysgenad_, _negesydd_

Cour-te-ous, _hyfoes_, _moesgar_, _boneddigaidd_

Cov-e-nant, _cyfammod_, _cytundeb_

Cov-et-ous, _trachwantus_, _cybyddlyd_

Cre-a-tion, _creadigaeth_; _cread_; _y bydysawd_

Cred-i-ble, _credadwy_, _coeladwy_

Cred-it-or, _achretor_, _gofynwr_, _coeliwr_

Crim-in-al, _troseddwr_, _drygweithredydd_; _troseddog_

Crit-ic-al, _beirniadol_; _manwl_, _enbyd_

Crit-i-cise, _beirniadu_; _arholi_; _beio_

Crook-ed-ness, _camedd_; _bachogrwydd_

Cru-ci-ble, _toddlestr_, _toddiadur_

Cru-ci-fy, _croeshoelio_, _hoelio ar y groes_

Cru-el-ty, _creulondeb_, _mileindra_

Cul-pa-ble, _beius_, _ar y cam_; _euog_

Cul-ti-vate, _diwyllio_, _amaethu_; _gwareiddio_

Cum-ber-some, _rhwystrus_; _beichiol_; _cymmysg_

Cur-a-ble, _gwelladwy_, _iachadwy_

Cu-ri-ous, _cywrain manwl_; _ymchwilgar_

Cur-ren-cy, _cylchrediad_, _treigliad_, _arian treigl_

Cur-va-ture, _camedd_, _crymedd_

Cus-to-dy, _cadwraeth_; _dalfa_, _carchar_

Cus-tom-er, _prynwr_, _cwsmer_, _derbynydd_

Dam-na-tion, _colledigaeth_, _damnedigaeth_

Dan-ger-ous, _peryglus_, _enbyd_; _niweidiol_

De-bauch-ment, _llygriad_, _halogiad_; _hud_

De-ben-ture, _dylysgrif_, _hawleb_, _hawlysgrif_

De-cay-ing, _methiant_, _dadfail_

De-ceit-ful, _twyllodrus_, _dichellgar_

De-ceiv-ing, _twylliad_, _hocediad_; _twyll_

De-cem-ber, _Rhagfyr_

De-cen-cy, _gweddusrwydd_, _harddwch_

De-cep-tion, _twyll_, _hud_, _dichell_, _ffalsedd_

De-ci-mals, _degiadaeth_, _degraniaeth_

De-ci-pher, _dehongli_, _egluro_, _darllen celnodau_

De-cis-ion, _penderfyinad_; _barniad_

De-ci-sive, _penderfynol_, _terfynol_

De-clar-ing, _mynegiad_, _traethiad_; _amlygiad_

De-clen-sion, _gogwyddiad_; _treigliad_

De-clin-ing, _ar ogwydd_, _ar ball_, _yn ammharu_

De-coc-tion, _trwyth_; _berwad_

De-com-pose, _dadgyfansoddi_; _dadgyssylltu_

Dec-o-rate, _addurno_, _harddu_, _prydferthu_

De-co-rous, _gweddus_, _addwyn_: _trefnus_

De-co-rum, _gweddusder_, _harddwch_; _trefn_

Ded-i-cate, _cyflwynedig_: _cyflwyno_, _cyssegru_

De-duc-tion, _tyniad ymaith_; _lleihad_

De-fault-er, _pallwr_, _methwr_: _palldalwr_

De-fec-tive, _gwallus_, _ammherffaith_

De-fend-ant, _amddiffynydd_; _amddiffynol_

De-fen-sive, _amddiffyn_; _amddiffynol_

Def-er-ence, _parch_, _bri_; _ymostyngiad_

De-fi-ance, _her_, _beiddiad_, _sialens_

De-fi-cient, _dyffygiol_; _ammherffaith_

Def-i-nite, _peth dosbenedig_; _dosbenol_; _penodol_; _sicr_; _eglur_

De-flec-tion, _osgoad_, _gogwyddiad_; _enciliad_

De-fray-ing, _digostiad_, _costddygiad_

De-i-ty, _Duwdod_, _Duwdeb_

De-ject-ed, _llwfr_, _trist_, _galarus_

De-jec-tion, _prudd-der_, _tristwch_

Del-e-gate, _cenad_, _cenadwr_: _cenadu_, _dirprwyo_

Del-i-cate, _tyner_; _mwythus_; _moesgar_; _gwanaidd_; _canaidd_

De-li-cious, _danteithiol_; _melusber_; _hyfryd_

De-light-ful, _hyfryd_, _difyr_, _hoff_

De-lin-quent, _troseddwr_; _beius_, _camweddus_

De-liv-er, _gwaredu_, _achub_; _traddodi_; _traethu_

De-lu-sion, _twyll_, _hudoliaeth_; _cyfeiliornad_

De-mean-or, _ymddygiad_, _buchedd_; _dull_

De-mer-it, _anhaeddiant_: _anhaeddu_

De-mol-ish, _dinystrio_, _dystrywio_; _difrodi_

De-mon-strate, _arddangos_, _profi_, _hysbysu_

De-ni-al, _gwad_, _gwadiad_; _nag_, _nacâd_

Den-si-ty, _tewedd_, _dwysder_, _cynnwysedd_

De-part-ment, _lle_, _swydd_; _dosbarth_; _talaeth_

De-part-ure, _ymadawiad_; _marwolaeth_

De-pend-ence, _ymddibyniad_, _ymddiried_

De-pend-ent, _dibynwr_, _ymddibynydd_

De-po-nent, _gwaesafydd_; _tystiwr_, _ardyst_

De-pos-it, _adneu_, _gwystl_: _dodi_, _rhoddi_, _gosod_

Dep-re-cate, _gwrthymbil_; _erfyn_; _gofidio am_

De-pres-sion, _iseliad_, _gostyngiad_; _trymder_

Dep-u-ty, _rhaglaw_, _dirprwywr_, _cenad_

De-range-ment, _annhrefn_; _dyryswch_

De-ri-sion, _gwatwariad_, _gwawdiad_

De-scend-ant, _disgynydd_; _hiliogaeth_

De-scend-ed, _disgynedig_; _hanedig_

De-scrip-tion, _darluniad_; _adroddiad_; _ysgrifeniad_

De-scrip-tive, _darluniol_, _dysgrifiol_

De-sert-er, _ffoadur_, _enciliwr_

De-serv-ing, _haeddiant_; _teilyngdod_; _haeddiannol_

Des-ig-nate, _penodedig_: _dynodi_, _arwyddocäu_

De-sir-ous, _chwannog_, _awyddus_

Des-o-late, _anghyfannedd_: _anghyfanneddu_, _diffeitheio_; _difrodi_

Des-pe-rate, _diobaith_; _ffyrnig_; _peryglus_

Des-pot-ic, _gormesdeyrnog_; _creulawn_

Des-pot-ism, _trawsawdurdod_; _gormesdeyrnedd_

Des-ti-ny, _tynged_; _ffawd_, _rhaid_

Des-ti-tute, _amddifad_; _angenog_: _amddifadu_

De-struc-tion, _dystryw_, _dinystr_; _colledigaeth_

De-struc-tive, _dystrywiol_, _dinystriol_; _marwol_

De-tach-ment, _dydoliad_; _gwahanlu_

De-tec-tion, _dadguddiad_; _canfyddiad_

De-ter-mine, _penderfynu_; _penu_, _bwriadu_

Det-ri-ment, _colled_, _niwed_; _aflwydd_

De-vel-op, _dadhuddo_, _dadblygu_; _dadguddio_

De-vi-ate, _gwyro_; _cyfeiliorni_; _cilio_

De-vo-tion, _dyhewyd_, _duwiolder_; _addoliad_

Di-a-dem, _coron_, _talaith_

Di-a-gram, _llun_, _darlun_, _arddangosddull_

Di-a-lect, _priodiaith_, _amrywiaith_; _iaith_

Di-a-logue, _ymddyddan_, _cynnadledd_

Di-a-mond, _adamant_; _gemlythyren_

Di-a-ry, _dyddiadur_, _dyddlyfr_

Dic-ta-tion, _gorchymmyniad_; _dywediad_

Dic-ta-tor, _penrheolwr_; _gwersroddwr_

Dif-fer-ence, _gwahaniaeth_; _anghytundeb_: _gwahaniaethu_, _gwahanu_

Dif-fer-ent, _gwahanol_, _amrywiol_, _amgen_

Dif-fi-cult, _anhawdd_, _dyrys_, _trallodus_.

Dif-fi-dence, _anymddiried_, _anhyder_

Dif-fi-dent, _anymddiriedus_, _anhyderus_

Dif-fu-sion, _taeniad_, _lledaeniad_, _gwasgariad_

Di-ges-tion, _treuliant_, _traul ymborth_

Dig-ni-fy, _urddasu_, _anrhydeddu_; _urddo_

Dig-ni-ty, _urddas_, _bri_, _cymmeriad_; _uchelradd_

Di-gres-sion, _crwydriad_, _ysgoad_, _enciliad_

Dil-i-gence, _dyfalwch_, _diwydrwydd_; _prysurglud_

Dil-i-gent, _dyfal_, _diwyd_, _prysur_, _gofalus_

Di-men-sion, _mesur_, _maint_, _maintioli_

Di-min-ish, _lleihau_, _prinhau_; _bychanu_

Di-o-cese, _esgobaeth_, _esgobawd_

Di-plo-ma, _graddlythyr_, _urddlythyr_

Di-rec-tion, _cyfeiriad_, _hyfforddiad_; _gorchymmyn_

Di-rect-ly, _yn union_, _yn gyfeiriol_; _yn ddioed_; _ar gyfer_; _yn
ddigyfrwng_

Di-rect-or, _cyfarwyddwr_; _arolygydd_; _cynghorwr_

Dis-a-ble, _analluogi_, _anaddasu_; _rhwystro_

Dis-a-gree, _anghytuno_, _anghydsynio_

Dis-al-low, _llysu_, _gwrthod_, _anghymmeradwyo_

Dis-an-nul, _dilëu_, _diddymu_, _dirymu_

Dis-ap-pear, _diflanu_, _dadymddangos_

Dis-ap-point, _somi_, _twyllo_

Dis-ap-prove, _anghymmeradwyo_; _gwrthod_

Dis-as-ter, _trychineb_, _anffawd_: _mallu_, _aflwyddo_

Dis-as-trous, _trychinebus_; _anffodus_

Dis-be-lief, _anghrediniaeth_, _anghred_

Dis-be-lieve, _anghredu_, _anghoelio_

Dis-burse-ment, _taliad_, _traul_

Dis-cern-ing, _dirnadaeth_; _craffus_, _deallus_

Dis-ci-ple, _dysgybl_; _ysgoläig_: _dysgu_

Dis-ci-pline, _dysgyblaeth_: _dysgyblu_

Dis-clos-ure, _dynoethiad_, _dadguddiad_

Dis-com-fit, _gorchfygiad_: _gorchfygu_

Dis-com-pose, _aflonyddu_; _annhrefnu_

Dis-con-tent, _anfoddlawn_: _anfoddloni_

Dis-cov-er, _darganfod_, _dadguddio_

Dis-cour-age, _anghefnogi_, _llyfrhau_

Dis-cred-it, _anghlod_: _gwarthruddo_

Dis-cre-tion, _callineb_, _synwyr_, _pwyll_

Dis-cus-sion, _holiad_, _chwiliad_, _dadleuad_

Dis-dain-ful, _diystyrllyd_, _dirmygol_

Dis-em-bark, _tirio_, _glanio_, _dadlongi_

Dis-em-bogue, _ymarllwys_; _ymdywallt_

Dis-en-gage, _rhyddhau_; _dadrysu_

Dis-en-thral, _dadgaethiwo_; _rhyddhau_

Dis-fig-ure, _anffurfio_, _aflunio_

Dis-fran-chise, _difreinio_, _difreintio_

Dis-grace-ful, _gwarthus_, _gwaradwyddus_

Dis-gust-ing, _diflas_, _ffiaidd_, _anhyfryd_

Dis-hon-est, _anonest_, _anghyfiawn_

Dis-hon-our, _dianrhydedd_: _dianrhydeddu_

Dis-junc-tion, _dadgyssylltiad_, _gwahaniad_

Dis-lo-cate, _dadgymmalu_; _symmud_

Dis-mis-sion, _gollyngdod_, _rhyddhâd_

Dis-o-bey, _anufyddhau_; _troseddu_

Dis-or-der, _annhrefn_: _annhrefnu_

Dis-par-age, _bychanu_, _dirmygu_, _dibrisio_

Dis-pleas-ure, _anfoddlonrwydd_; _digofaint_

Dis-pos-al, _trefniad_; _triniaeth_; _gwerthiad_

Dis-pos-sess, _difeddiannu difuddio_

Dis-re-gard, _esgeulusdod_; _diystyrwch_: _esgeuluso_; _diystyru_

Dis-sem-ble, _ffugio_, _rhagrithio_; _celu_

Dis-sen-sion, _anghydfod_, _anghydsyniad_

Dis-si-pate, _gwasgaru_; _gwastraffu_

Dis-so-lute, _penrydd_; _afradlawn_

Dis-tem-per, _clefyd_, _afiechyd_: _heintio_; _llygru_

Dis-tinc-tion, _gwahaniaeth_; _rhagoriaeth_

Dis-tinct-ive, _gwahaniaethol_; _dirnadol_

Dis-tin-guish, _gwahaniaethu_, _dynodi_; _canfod_

Dis-tress-ing, _gofidus_, _trallodus_, _poenus_

Dis-trib-ute, _cyfranu_, _dosbarthu_, _parthu_

Dis-turb-ance, _aflonyddwch_, _cynhwrf_

Di-ver-sion, _difyrwch_, _digrifwch_

Div-i-dend, _rhan_, _cyfran_; _talgyfran_

Di-vis-ion, _rhaniad_, _parthiad_, _ysgâr_

Di-ur-nal, _dyddiadur_; _dyddiol_

Diz-zi-ness, _syfrdandod_, _pendro_

Doc-u-ment, _addysg_; _prawfysgrif_: _addysgu_

Do-mes-tic, _cartrefol_, _teuluaidd_

Dom-i-neer, _arglwyddiaethu_, _llywodraethu_

Do-min-ion, _arglwyddiaeth_, _llywodraeth_

Do-na-tion, _rhodd_, _anrheg_; _rhoddiad_

Dow-a-ger, _gwaddolog_, _gweddw waddolog_

Drow-si-ness, _cysgadrwydd_, _syrthni_

Du-bi-ous, _amhëus_; _ansefydlog_

Du-pli-cate, _adysgrifen_; _dyblygu_

Du-ra-ble, _parhäus_, _parhaol_

Du-ra-tion, _parhâd_, _ysbaid_

Du-ti-ful, _ufydd_, _gostyngedig_; _parchus_

Dy-nas-ty, _llywodlin_, _breninlin_; _llywodraeth_

Ea-ger-ness, _taerni_, _awydd_; _taerflys_

Ea-ger-ly, _yn daer_, _yn awyddus_

Ear-nest-ly, _yn ddifrifol_; _o ddifrif_

Earth-en-ware, _llestri pridd_, _priddlestri_

Ea-si-ly, _yn esmwyth_; _yn rhwydd_

Eat-a-ble, _bwytadwy_, _hyfwyd_

Eat-a-bles, _bwydydd_, _lluniaeth_

Ec-cen-tric, _afreolaidd_, _gwyrog_; _hynod_

Ed-i-ble, _bwytadwy_, _hyfwyd_

Ed-i-fice, _adeilad_; _adeiladaeth_

Ed-i-fy, _adeiladu_; _addysgu_, _hyfforddi_

E-di-tion, _argraffiad_; _cyhoeddiad_

Ed-i-tor, _golygydd_; _cyhoeddwr_

Ed-u-cate, _addysgu_, _hyfforddi_; _dysgu_

Ef-fect-ive, _effeithiol_

Ef-fi-cient, _effeithiol_, _achosol_, _galluog_

Ef-fi-gy, _llun_, _delw_; _gwrthrych_

E-go-tism, _myfïaeth_, _hunanoldeb_

E-gre-gious, _nodedig_, _rhagorol_; _digyffelyb_

E-jec-tion, _bwriad allan didyad_

E-ject-ment, _didyad_, _difeddiannad_

E-las-tic, _hydwyth_, _gwrthneidiol_, _ystwyth_

E-lec-tion, _etholiad_, _dewisiad_

E-lect-ive, _etholiadol_, _dewisiadol_

El-e-gance, _tlysni_, _gwychder_, _tegwch_

El-e-gant, _tlws_, _dillynaidd_; _glandeg_

El-e-gy, _galarnad_, _marwnad_, _alaethgan_

El-e-ment, _elfen_, _defnydd_: _elfenu_; _egwyddori_

El-e-phant, _cawrfil_, _elephant_; _oliffant_

El-e-vate, _dyrchafu_, _cyfodi_; _mawrhau_

El-lip-sis, _hirgylch_, _hirgrwn_; _diffyg_

E-lope-ment, _ciliad_, _dirgeliad_; _enciliad gyda chariad_

El-o-quence, _hyawdledd_, _ffraethineb_

El-o-quent, _hyawdl_, _ffraeth_, _ymadroddus_

Em-a-nate, _teneuo_, _culhau_; _nychu_

Em-bank-ment, _argloddiad_; _arglawdd_, _argae_

Em-bar-rass, _dyrysu_, _nidro_; _trallodi_

Em-bas-sy, _cenadaeth_, _cenadwriaeth_

Em-bel-lish, _addurno_, _harddu_, _prydferthu_

Em-bez-zle, _darnguddio_, _celcio_, _lladrata_

Em-bod-y, _corffori_, _cydgorffoli_; _tewychu_

Em-bra-sure, _muragoriad_, _muregor_

Em-bry-o, _anelwig_, _gorllyd_, _milrith_

E-met-ic, _cyfog_; _cyfogol_; _gloesbair_

Em-i-grant, _ymfudwr_; _ymfudol_

Em-i-grate, _ymfudo_; _mudo_, _trawsfudo_

Em-i-nence, _uchelfa_, _uchder_; _mawredd_

Em-i-nent, _uchel_; _godidog_, _hynod_

E-mo-tion, _cyffro_, _cynhyrfiad_, _cyffrawd_

Em-per-or, _amherawdwr_, _ymherawdwr_

Em-pha-sis, _pwyslais_; _pwysnod_

Em-pha-tic, _pwysig_, _pwysleisiol_; _nerthol_

Em-ploy-ment, _gwaith_, _gorchwyliaeth_; _galwad_

Em-ploy-er, _gorchwyliwr_, _gweithosodwr_

Em-pow-er, _galluogi_, _awdurdodi_

Em-u-late, _rhagorgeisio_, _dynwared_, _efelychu_

En-a-ble, _galluogi_, _nerthu_, _cynnorthwyo_

En-a-mel, _emliw_, _gleinliw_: _emliwio_

En-a-mour, _swyno_; _traserchu yn_

En-camp-ment, _gwersylliad_; _gwersyll_

En-chant-ment, _swyn_, _cyfaredd_, _dewiniaeth_

En-cir-cle, _cylchynu_, _amgylchu_

En-clo-sure, _cae_, _cadlas_, _caeadle_

En-com-pass, _amgylchu_, _cwmpasu_; _amgau_

En-coun-ter, _ymgyrch_, _brwydr_: _ymgyrchu_, _brwydro_

En-cour-age, _cefnogi_, _calonogi_, _annog_

En-croach-ment, _cyfyngiad_; _traisfeddiant_

En-cum-ber, _lluddias_, _rhwystro_; _gorlwytho_

En-dan-ger, _peryglu_; _niweidio_, _anturio_

En-deav-our, _cais_, _ymgais_: _ymegnio_, _ymgeisio_

En-dorse-ment, _cefnysgrif_, _arysgrifen_

En-dow-ment, _gwaddol_, _cynnysgaeth_

En-du-rance, _parhâd_; _goddefiad_

En-e-my, _gelyn_, _gwrthwynebydd_

En-er-gy, _grym_, _egni_, _nerth_

En-fee-ble, _gwanhau_, _llesgau_

En-force-ment, _grymusiad_, _cadarnhâd_; _gorfodaeth_

En-fran-chise, _rhyddfreinio_, _rhyddhau_

En-gage-ment, _rhwymedigaeth_; _ammod_; _brwydr_

En-gag-ing, _deniadol_, _serchus_; _boddhaol_

En-gin-eer, _peiriannydd_, _peiriannwr_

En-grav-er, _cerfiedydd_; _cerfluniwr_

En-light-en, _goleuo_, _llewyrchu_

E-nig-ma, _dychymmyg_, _dammeg_

En-joy-ment, _mwynhâd_; _meddiant_; _hyfrydwch_

En-large-ment, _helaethiad_; _rhyddhâd_

En-liv-en, _adfywio_, _bywhau_, _bywiogi_

En-mi-ty, _gelyniaeth_; _casineb_

En-no-ble, _pendefigo_; _urddasu_; _ardderchogi_

E-nor-mous, _anferth_; _dirfawr_; _dychrynllyd_

En-tan-gle, _dyrysu_, _maglu_; _rhwystro_

En-ter-ing, _mynediad_; _cyntedd_

En-ter-prise, _antur_, _anturiaeth_: _anturio_

En-ter-tain, _croesawu_; _cynnal_; _derbyn_

En-tice-ment, _hudoliaeth_; _annogaeth_

En-tire-ly, _yn gyfan_, _i gyd_; _yn llwyrgwbl_

En-ti-tle, _hawlogi_; _enwi_; _addasu_

En-ti-ty, _endid_, _bod_, _hanfod_

En-treat-y, _atolwg_, _deisyfiad_, _dymuniad_

En-vel-ope, _amlen_, _gorchudd_, _amwisg_

En-vel-op, _cuddio_, _gorchuddio_, _amlenu_

En-vi-ous, _cenfigenus_; _gelynol_

En-vi-ron, _amgylchu_, _cylchynu_

En-vi-rons, _amgylchoedd_, _cylchynau_

Ep-i-cure, _glwth_, _gloddestwr_; _moethyn_

Ep-i-gram, _englyn_, _pennill_

E-pis-tle, _llythyr_, _epistol_

Ep-i-taph, _beddargraff_, _beddysgrif_

Ep-i-thet, _cyfenw_, _ansoddair_, _chwanegair_: _enwi_, _cyfenwi_;
_ansoddenwi_

E-qua-tion, _cyfartaliad_; _cymmedriad_

E-qua-tor, _cyhydedd_, _llinyn y cyhydedd_

E-qui-nox, _cyhydnos_; _alban_

E-qui-page, _taclau_, _trec_; _addurnwisg_

E-quip-ment, _treciad_, _addurniad_

E-qui-poise, _cydbwys_, _mantoledd_

E-rec-tion, _codiad_; _adeiladiad_; _adail_

E-rup-tion, _rhuthr_; _crugdardd_; _bala_

Es-cu-lent, _ymborth_; _bwytadwy_

Es-pou-sal, _dyweddïad_; _dyweddïol_

Es-sen-tial, _hanfod_; _y prif bwngc_; _hanfodol_

Es-pe-cial, _neillduol_, _arbenig_

Es-tab-lish, _sefydlu_, _cadarnhau_; _sylfaenu_

Es-ti-mate, _cyfrif_, _tybgyfrif_: _prisio_

E-ter-nal, _y Tragwyddol_; _tragywyddol_

E-va-sion, _gocheliad_, _ciliad_, _dichell_

Ev-er-more, _yn wastadol_, _yn barhäus_; _byth_

Ev-e-ry, _pob_; _pawb_

Ev-i-dence, _prawf_, _tystiolaeth_; _amlygrwydd_: _profi_, _tystio_,
_amlygu_

Ev-i-dent, _amlwg_, _eglur_, _hynod_

Ex-ac-tion, _myniad_, _treisgodiad_; _gormes_

Ex-act-ness, _manyldeb_, _cywirdeb_

Ex-act-ly, _yn gywir_, _yn fanwl_

Ex-am-ine, _holi_, _chwilio_, _ymofyn am_; _ystyried_; _profi_

Ex-am-ple, _engraifft_, _cynllun_; _siampl_

Ex-ca-vate, _ceuo_, _cafnu_, _cloddio_

Ex-ceed-ing, _rhagorol_; _dirfawr_; _rhagorddwyn_

Ex-cel-lence, _rhagoriaeth_, _ardderchogrwydd_

Ex-cel-lent, _rhagorol_, _godidog_, _enwog_

Ex-cep-tion, _eithrad_, _eithriad_; _gwrthddadl_

Ex-ces-sive, _gormodol_, _dirfawr_; _anghymmedrol_

Ex-cheq-uer, _trysorlys_, _sylltty_: _cyllidlysio_

Ex-cise-man, _cyllidydd_, _tollydd_; _chwilgi_

Ex-clu-sion, _bwriad allan_; _gwrthodiad_

Ex-clu-sive, _allgauadol_; _eithrol_; _oddi eithr_

Ex-cul-pate, _difeio_, _esgusodi_; _rhyddhau_

Ex-cur-sion, _gwib_, _gwibdaith_; _tramwyad_

Ex-e-cute, _gwneuthur_, _cyflawni_; _marwolaethu_

Ex-er-cise, _ymarfer_; _gorchwyl_: _arfer_, _ymarfer_

Ex-er-tion, _ymegnïad_, _ymdrechiad_; _cais_

Ex-haus-tion, _dyhysbyddiad_; _blinder_

Ex-hib-it, _prawfysgrif_: _dangos_, _arddangos_

Ex-i-gence, _angen_, _eisiau_; _cyfyngder_

Ex-i-gent, _rheidwys_; _angenrheidiol_; _cyfyng_

Ex-ist-ence, _bod_, _hanfod_; _bywyd_; _parhâd_

Ex-ist-ent, _yn bod_; _hanfodol_; _ar gael_

Ex-pan-sion, _llediad_, _taeniad_; _helaethiad_

Ex-pe-dite, _brysio_; _rhwyddhau_; _brysiol_

Ex-pen-sive, _treulfawr_, _costus_; _drud_

Ex-pi-ate, _dyhuddo_; _dyhuddo âg aberth_; _iawnu_

Ex-plic-it, _eglur_, _amlwg_; _pendant_

Ex-plo-sion, _ffrwydriad_, _ergyd_; _rhuthr_

Ex-pres-sion, _mynegiad_, _adroddiad_; _ymadrodd_; _gwasgiad_

Ex-pres-sive, _mynegol_, _traethol_; _darluniadol_

Ex-press-ly, _yn eglur_; _yn bendant_, _yn hysbys_

Ex-pul-sion, _tafliad allan_, _ymlidiad_

Ex-qui-site, _rhagorol_, _godidog_; _dewisedig_; _manwl_, _perffaith_

Ex-ten-sion, _ystyniad_; _eangiad_, _helaethiad_

Ex-ten-sive, _helaeth_, _eang_; _mawr_

Ex-tin-guish, _diffoddi_, _diffodd_; _dilëu_

Ex-tir-pate, _diwreiddio_, _dinystrio_; _symmud_

Ex-tor-tion, _cribddail_, _treisiad_; _gorthrwm_

Ex-trac-tion, _tyniad_, _tyniad allan_, _llinach_

Ex-treme-ly, _yn eithaf_; _dros ben_; _yn aruthr_

Ex-tri-cate, _rhyddhau_, _dadrysu_; _dadblygu_

Ex-trin-sic, _allanol_; _ammhriodol_

Ex-u-viæ, _pl._ _ystelion_, _diosgion_

Eye-serv-ice, _llygad-wasanaeth_

Eye-wit-ness, _llygattyst_, _golygdyst_

Fab-ri-cate, _adeiladu_; _gwneuthnr_; _dyfeisio_

Fa-ce-tious, _digrif_, _cellweirus_, _llawen_

Fac-to-ry, _gweithfa_, _gweithdy_; _masnachfa_

Fac-ul-ty, _gallu_, _medr_, _teithi_, _medrusrwydd_

Faith-ful-ness, _ffyddlondeb_; _gonestrwydd_

Fal-la-cious, _twyllodrus_, _dichellgar_

Fal-la-cy, _twyll_, _lledrith_, _hudoliaeth_

Fal-si-fy, _ffugio_; _celwyddo_; _gwyrdroi_

Fal-ter-ing, _gwendid_; _attal dywedyd_

Fam-i-ly, _teulu_, _tylwyth_; _gwaedoliaeth_

Fa-mil-iar, _cyfaill_, _cydnabod_; _teuluaidd_; _cyfeillgar_; _cynnefin_

Fan-ci-ful, _dychymmygol_, _coegdybus_

Fan-tas-tic, _gwamalddyn_; _dychymmygol_

Fas-ci-nate, _swyno_, _rhinio_, _hudo_

Fa-tal-ly, _yn angeuol_; _mewn angen_

Fath-om-less, _diwaelod_; _anamgyffred_; _dwfn_

Fa-vour-ite, _hoffddyn_, _anwylyd_, _hoffyn_

Fel-low-ship, _cymdeithas_: _cymdeithasu_

Fel-o-ny, _cyflafan_; _lladrad_

Fem-in-ine, _benywol_, _menywaidd_; _tyner_

Fe-ro-cious, _ffyrnig_, _creulawn_, _brochwyllt_

Fer-ven-cy, _gwresogrwydd_; _brwdfrydedd_

Fes-ti-val, _gwyl_; _gwledd_; _gwleddol_; _llawen_

Fil-a-ment, _edefyn_; _meinwreiddyn_

Fi-nal-ly, _yn ddiweddaf_, _yn olaf_; _o'r diwedd_

Fir-ma-ment, _ffurfafen_, _wybr_, _entrych_

Fis-tu-la, _pibell_; _pibglwyf_

Flat-ter-er, _gwenieithiwr_, _truthiwr_

Flat-u-lence, _gwyntogrwydd_, _gwyntchwydd_

Flat-u-lent, _gwyntog_, _chwyddedig_; _gwag_

Flex-i-ble, _hyblyg_, _ystwyth_; _anwadal_

Flour-ish-ing, _blodeuog_, _blagurol_; _llwyddiannus_

Fluc-tu-ate, _tonio_; _bwhwman_; _petruso_

Flu-en-cy, _ffrydiolrwydd_; _hyawdledd_

Fo-li-o, _dalen lawn_

For-as-much, _yn gymaint_, _gan_, _o herwgdd_, _am_

For-bear-ance, _dyoddefgarwch_, _ymaros_

For-bid-den, _gwaharddedig_, _gwarafunedig_

For-ci-ble, _cadarn_, _hyrym_, _nerthol_

For-eign-er, _alldud_, _estron_

Fore-know-ledge, _rhagwybodaeth_

For-get-ful, _anghofus_

For-feit-ure, _collediad_, _fforffediad_

For-give-ness, _maddeuant_, _gollyngdod_

For-giv-ing, _maddeugar_; _trugarog_

For-ma-tion, _ffurfiad_, _lluniad_

For-mer-ly, _gynt_, _cyn hyn_, _er ystalm_

For-mu-la, _ffurfreol_, _ffurf_

For-ti-fy, _cadarnhau_; _caeru_, _cryfhau_

For-tu-nate, _ffyniannus_, _ffodiog_

Foun-da-tion, _sail_, _sylfaen_

Fran-gi-ble, _hydor_, _breuol_

Fra-ter-nal, _brawdol_, _brawdgar_

Frat-ri-cide, _brawdladdiad_

Fraud-u-lence, _dichellgar_, _twyllgarwch_

Fraud-u-lent, _twyllodrus_

Friv-o-lous, _dibwys_, _disylwedd_

Frol-ic-some, _gorhoenus_, _chwareugar_

Front-is-piece, _talwyneb_; _gwyneblun_

Fro-ward-ness, _afrywiogrwydd_

Fruc-ti-fy, _cnydio_; _ffrwythiannu_

Fu-gi-tive, _ffoadur_; _ffoadurus_

Ful-mi-nate, _taranu_; _bygwth_

Fun-da-ment, _yr eisteddfa_, _rhefr_

Fu-ner-al, _angladd_; _angladdol_

Fu-ri-ous, _ffyrnig_, _gorphwyllog_

Fur-nish-ing, _diwalliad_; _dodrefniad_

Fur-ni-ture, _dodrefn_; _trec_, _taclau_

Fur-ther-ance, _rhwyddhâd_; _cynnorthwy_

Fur-ther-more, _ym mhellach_, _heb law hyny_

Fu-si-ble, _toddadwy_, _hydawdd_

Ga-bi-on, _caergawell_, _differgawell_

Gal-lant-ry, _dewredd_, _gwroldeb_

Gal-ler-y, _oriel_, _uwchlawr_

Gal-van-ism, _trydaniaeth mettelaidd_

Gar-ri-son, _gwarchadlu_; _amddiffynfa_: _gwarchlueddu_

Gath-er-ing, _cynnulliad_; _crawniad_

Gaz-et-teer, _cyhoeddwr newyddion_, _darlundraith_

Gel-a-tine, _ceuledig_

Gen-er-al, _cadflaenor_; _cyffredin_; _mynych_; _cyffredinol_

Ge-ni-al, _genedigol_; _rhywiog_; _llon_

Gen-er-ous, _haelionus_, _rhwyddgalon_

Ge-ni-us, _athrylith_, _anian_, _awen_

Gen-teel-ness, _boneddigeiddrwydd_

Gen-tle-man, _boneddwr_

Gen-tle-ness, _addfwynder_, _tiriondeb_

Gen-u-ine, _pur_, _digymmysg_

Germ-in-ate, _blaguro_, _egino_

Gid-di-ness, _penddaredd_; _y bendro_

Gi-gan-tic, _cawraidd_, _dirfawr_

Glo-ri-fy, _gogoneddu_; _mawrygu_

Glos-sa-ry, _geirddehonglydd_; _geirlyfr_

Glu-tin-ous, _gludiog_

Glut-ton-y, _glythineb_, _bolrythi_

God-li-ness, _duwioldeb_, _dwyfolder_

Gor-man-dize, _bolrythu_

Gov-ern-ess, _llywiadures_; _athrawes_

Gov-ern-ing, _llywiad_: _yn llywio_

Gov-ern-ment, _llywodraeth_

Gra-da-tion, _graddiad_, _esgyniad_

Grad-u-al, _graddol_, _graddesgynol_

Grad-u-ate, _graddolwr_, _urddawg_: _graddio_, _graddoli_

Grand-ju-ry, _uchelreithwyr_

Grate-ful-ness, _diolchgarwch_

Grat-i-fy, _boddhau_; _gwobrwyo_

Grat-i-tude, _diolchgarwch_, _iolwch_

Greed-i-ness, _aingc_, _awch_, _gwangc_

Guar-an-tee, _gwarantydd_: _gwarantu_

Guard-i-an, _gwarchodwr_

Gut-tur-al, _cegaidd_; _garw seiniol_

Gym-nas-tic, _gorchestol_

Hand-i-ly, _yn hylaw_, _yn fedrus_

Hand-ker-chief, _cadach_, _llawfoled_

Har-mo-ny, _cynghanedd_, _cysondeb_

Heart-i-ly, _yn galonog_; _o'r galon_

Heav-en-ly, _nefolaidd_, _nefawl_

Heav-i-ly, _yn drwm_, _yn bwysig_

Hem-i-sphere, _haner pelen_, _arddrych_

Hence-for-ward, _bellach_, _rhagllaw_

Hep-ta-gon, _seithochrog_

Here-af-ter, _ar ol hyn_, _wedi hyn_, _rhagllaw_

Her-e-sy, _geulith_, _geugred_, _heresi_

Her-it-age, _etifeddiaeth_, _treftadaeth_

Hes-i-tate, _ammeu_, _petruso_

Hex-a-gon, _chwechochrog_

Hi-ber-nal, _gauafaidd_

Hid-e-ous, _hyll_, _erchyll_

High-mind-ed, _uchelfrydig_, _trahaus_

Hin-der-ance, _rhwystr_, _lludd_

His-to-ry, _hanes_, _hanesyddiaeth_

Hith-er-to, _hyd yma_, _hyd yn hyn_

Hom-i-ly, _byrdraith_

Hon-est-y, _uniondeb_; _rhin_

Ho-ri-zon, _terfyngylch_, _gorwel_

Hor-ri-ble, _erchyll_, _ofnadwy_

Horse-man-ship, _marchwriaeth_

Hos-pi-tal, _ysbytty_, _clafdy_

How-be-it, _er hyny_, _er hyn oll_

Hu-man-kind, _dynolryw_

Hu-mor-ous, _penchwiban_; _digrif_

Hur-ri-cane, _hyrddwynt_, _corwynt_

Hus-band-man, _arddwr_, _amaethydd_

Hus-band-ry, _llafuriaeth_, _amaethyddiaeth_

Hy-drau-lics, _awelliaeth_

Hy-dro-gen, _ulai_

Hyp-o-crite, _rhagrithiwr_

I-ci-cle, _cloyn ia_, _cloch ia_

I-de-a, _meddylddrych_; _amgyffred_

Id-i-om, _ieithwedd_

Id-i-ot, _hurtyn_, _gwirionyn_

I-dle-ness, _segurdod_, _diogi_

Ig-no-ble, _anenwog_, _gwael_

Ig-no-rance, _anwybodaeth_, _annysg_

Ig-no-rant, _anwybodus_, _anhyddysg_

Il-le-gal, _anghyfreithlawn_

Il-lic-it, _anghyfreithlawn_, _annheg_

Ill-na-ture, _drwg dymher_

Il-lus-trate, _gloywi_; _egluro_, _amlygu_

Im-ag-ine, _dychymmygu_, _tybio_

Im-be-cile, _diallu_, _dirym_, _egwan_

Im-burse-ment, _cost_, _traul_

Im-i-tate, _dynwared_, _efelychu_

Im-mi-nent, _cyfagos_; _bygythiol_

Im-mod-est, _aflednais_; _anniwair_

Im-mor-al, _anfoesol_, _anfucheddol_

Im-mor-tal, _anfarwol_, _didrangc_

Im-par-tial, _diduedd_, _anmhleidgar_

Im-pa-tience, _diamyneddgarwch_

Im-pa-tient, _diamynedd_, _anoddefgar_

Im-peach-ment, _cyhuddgwyn_: _achwyn_; _attalfa_

Im-per-fect, _anmherffaith_, _diffygiol_

Im-pli-cate, _cymhlethu_; _cydgynnwys_

Im-plic-it, _cuddgasgliadol_; _diymchwiliad_

Im-port-ance, _pwys_; _cynnwysiad_, _ystyr_

Im-port-ant, _pwysfawr_, _dirfawr_

Im-pos-tor, _twyllwr_, _hudwr_

Im-pos-ture, _twyll_, _hudwaith_

Im-po-tent, _analluog_, _dinerth_

Im-pre-cate, _deisyfu drwg_, _rhegu_

Im-pres-sion, _argraffiad_; _argraff_

Im-pris-on, _carcharu_, _caethiwo_

Im-prop-er, _anghymwys_, _anaddas_

Im-prove-ment, _diwygiad_, _gwelliant_

Im-pru-dence, _annoethineb_, _ffoledd_

Im-pru-dent, _anghall_, _anhybwyll_

Im-pu-dence, _digywilidd-dra_

Im-pu-dent, _haerllug_, _digywilidd_

Im-pul-sion, _ffwyrad_, _gyrawd_

Im-pul-sive, _dirgymhellawl_

In-car-nate, _mewn cnawd_

In-cen-tive, _cynhyrfiad_; _cynnyrfiol_

In-ces-sant, _dibaid_, _didor_

In-ci-dence, _damwain_, _dygwyddiad_

In-ci-dent, _damweiniol_

In-cis-ion, _haciad_, _toriad_

In-cite-ment, _annogiad_

In-cle-ment, _gerwin_, _afrywiog_

In-com-mode, _rhwystro_

In-com-pact, _anghryno_

In-com-plete, _anghyfan_, _anghwbl_

In-cor-rect, _anghywir_, _gwallus_

In-cor-rupt, _anllygredig_, _dilwgr_

In-cu-bate, _dëor_

In-cum-bent, _perchenog bywiolaieth_

In-cur-sion, _ymgyrch_, _rhuthdaith_

In-debt-ed, _dyledus_; _rhwymedig_

In-de-cent, _anweddaidd_, _anhardd_

In-dent-ure, _celrwymiad_

In-di-cate, _dangos_, _mynegi_

In-dict-ment, _cyhudd_, _cyhuddgwyn_

In-di-gence, _angenoctyd_, _tlodi_

In-di-gent, _angenus_, _tlawd_

In-dig-nant, _digllawn_, _ffromddig_

In-di-rect, _anghyfeiriol_; _annheg_

In-dis-creet, _anghall_, _ansynwyrol_

In-dis-pose, _anaddasu_; _annhueddu_

In-dis-tinct, _aneglur_, _anhyglyw_

In-do-lence, _seguryd_, _diogi_

In-do-lent, _swrth_, _dioglyd_

In-duce-ment, _annogaeth_; _cymhelliad_

In-dul-gence, _anwes_; _cyd-ddygiad_; _tynerwch_

In-dul-gent, _anwesgar_; _trathyner_

In-dus-try, _diwydrydd_, _dyfalwch_

In-fam-ous, _gwaradwyddus_, _gwarthus_

In-fa-my, _anair_, _enllib_, _gwaradwydd_

In-fan-cy, _mabandod_, _mebyd_

In-fant-ry, _milwyr traed_; _peddyd_

In-fec-tion, _llwgr_, _haint_

In-fec-tious, _heintus_, _adwythig_

In-fer-ence, _casgliad_

In-fer-nal, _uffernol_, _dieflig_

In-fi-del, _anffyddiwr_; _anffyddiog_

In-fi-nite, _anfeidrol_, _annherfynol_

In-flec-tion, _plygiad i mewn_; _croesogwyddiad_

In-flic-tion, _cosproddiad_, _dial_

In-flu-ence, _dylanwad_: _dylanwadu_

In-form-er, _hysbyswr_; _achwynnwr_

In-fringe-ment, _trawsdoriad_, _toriad_

In-fu-sion, _tywalltiad_, _mwydiad_

In-fu-sive, _trwythol_, _mwydol_

In-hab-it, _cartrefu_, _cyfanneddu_

In-her-ence, _glyniad_, _ymlyniad_

In-her-ent, _cynenid_; _dwfnlynol_

In-her-it, _etifeddu_; _meddiannu_

In-hu-man, _creulawn_, _annynol_

In-jec-tion, _chwistrelliad i fewn_

In-i-tial, _dechreuol_, _egwyddorol_

In-i-tiate, _egwyddori_; _derbyn i fewn_

In-junc-tion, _gorchmmyn_, _archiad_

In-ju-ry, _cam_, _sarhad_, _niwed_

In-jus-tice, _anghyfiawnder_, _cam_

In-ner-most, _nesaf i fewn_

In-no-cence, _diniweidrwydd_

In-no-cent, _diniweid_, _dieuog_

In-qui-ry, _ymofyniad_, _chwiliad_

In-ser-tion, _gosodiad i fewn_

In-sin-cere, _anghywir_, _rhagrithiol_

In-sip-id, _diflas_; _merf_

In-si-tion, _impiad_, _imp_

In-so-lence, _trahausder_, _gorhyfder_

In-so-lent, _haerllug_, _taeog_

In-sol-vent, _methdalwr_

In-so-much, _yn gymaint_, _gan_; _hyd oni_, _fel_, _nes_

In-spec-tion, _gorucholygiad_

In-spect-or, _golygwr_, _goruchwyliwr_

In-stal-ment, _urddiad_; _rhan daliad_

In-stant-ly, _yn daer_, _yn ddyfal_; _yn ddioed_

In-sti-gate, _cynhyrfu_, _annog_

In-sti-tute, _egwyddor_; _gosodedigaeth_: _gosod_, _sefydlu_; _addysgu_

In-struc-tion, _addysg_, _hyfforddiad_

In-stru-ment, _peiriant_, _offeryn_

In-su-late, _ynysu_

In-sult-ing, _diystyrllyd_, _gwatwarus_

In-sur-ance, _diogeliad_, _digollediad_

In-sur-gent, _gwrthryfelwr_

In-te-ger, _cyfanrif_, _cyfangorff_

In-te-gral, _symawl_, _cyfan_

In-tel-lect, _deall_, _dealltwriaeth_; _synwyr_

In-ten-tion, _amcan_, _bwriad_

In-ter-cede, _myned rhwng_; _cyfryngu_

In-ter-cept, _rhwystro_, _attal_

In-ter-course, _rhyddrediad_; _cydgyfeillach_

In-ter-dict, _gwahardd_; _esgymuno_

In-ter-est, _budd_, _elw_; _llog_: _cynhyrfu_; _bod mewn gofal_

In-ter-fere, _cyfryngu_, _ymyru_

In-ter-im, _cyfamser_, _cyfrwng_

In-ter-line, _rhwnglinellu_

In-ter-lude, _coegchware_

In-ter-ment, _claddiad_, _claddedigaeth_

In-ter-mit, _dyspeidio_, _peidio_

In-ter-mix, _cymmysgu_, _cydgymmysgu_

In-ter-nal, _mewn_, _o fewn_

In-ter-pose, _myned rhwng_, _cyfryngu_

In-ter-pret, _dehongli_; _cyfieithu_

In-ter-sect, _cynghroesi_

In-ter-val, _cyfrwng_; _hamdden_

In-ter-vene, _cyfryngu_, _dyfod rhwng_

In-ter-view, _cyfrwch_, _ymgyfarfod_

In-test-ate, _heb ewyllys_, _anghymyn_

In-tes-tine, _tufewnol_, _cartrefol_

In-tes-tines, _ymysgar_, _perfedd_

In-ti-mate, _cyfaill_; _cyfeillgar_: _arwyddo_

In-trep-id, _gwrol_, _diofn_, _eon_, _hy_

In-tri-cate, _dyrys_, _rhwystrus_

In-trin-sic, _priodol_, _hanfod_, _cymmwynol_

In-tro-duce, _arwain i fewn_

In-tru-sion, _ymwthiad_, _gormesiad_

In-va-lid, _methfilwr_, _un methedig_; _gwan_, _dirym_

In-va-sion, _rhuthrgyrch_, _ymosodiad_

In-va-sive, _traisruthrol_, _rhuthrol_

In-vei-gle, _twyllo_, _llithio_, _hudo_

In-ven-tion, _dyfais_, _darfeddyliad_

In-vest-ment, _gwisgad_; _urddiad_; _gwarchead_

In-un-date, _llifeirio a dwfr_, _gorlifo_

Ir-ri-gate, _dyfrhau_; _dyfru_

Ir-ri-tate, _ystuno_, _herio_, _cynhyrfu_

It-er-ate, _ailddywedyd_

Jeal-ous-y, _eiddigedd_; _drwgdyb_

Jeop-ard-y, _perygl_, _enbydrwydd_

Jour-ney-man, _hurweithiwr_

Jo-vi-al, _digriflon_, _llon_

Joy-ful-ness, _lloniant_, _llawenydd_

Ju-bi-lee, _gwyl gyhoedd_, _Jubili_

Ju-di-cious, _call_, _deallus_, _synwyrol_

Judg-ment-seat, _gorsedd barn_

Jus-ti-fy, _cyfiawnhau_, _dieuogi_

Ju-ve-nile, _mabin_, _ieuengaidd_

Kid-nap-per, _lleidr personau_

La-bi-al, _gwefusawl_, _gweflol_

La-bour-er, _gweithiwr_, _ymboenwr_

La-bour-ing, _yn ymboeni_, _yn ymegnio_

Lab-y-rinth, _bachdrofa_

Lac-er-ate, _rhwygo_, _dryllio_, _darnio_

La-con-ic, _byreiriog_, _talfyr_

La-i-ty, _llëygion_, _gwyr llëyg_

Land-hold-er, _tirddaliwr_

Lar-ce-ny, _lladrad_, _chwiwladrad_

Lat-i-tude, _lledred_, _llydander_

Lat-ter-ly, _yn ddiweddar_

Laud-a-ble, _canmoladwy_, _gwiwglod_

Laugh-a-ble, _chwerthinus_, _digrifol_

Law-ful-ness, _cyfreithlondeb_

Lax-a-tion, _rhyddhad_, _llacâd_

Lax-i-ty, _rhyddni_, _y dolur rhydd_

La-zi-ness, _diogi_; _seguryd_

Leg-a-cy, _cymynrodd_

Le-ga-tion, _cenadwriaeth_

Leg-i-ble, _darllenadwy_; _eglur_

Leg-is-late, _gwneud deddfau_

Le-ni-ent, _tyner_, _esmwyth_

Lep-ro-sy, _gwahanglwyf_

Leth-ar-gy, _yr hunglwyf_, _gorchwsg_

Li-a-ble, _darostyngedig_, _rhwymedig_

Lib-er-al, _hael_; _rhydd_, _diragfarn_

Lib-er-ate, _rhydhau_, _gollwng_

Lib-er-tine, _un penrydd_; _anghrefyddol_

Lib-er-ty, _rhyddid_, _braint_; _hyfder_

Li-bra-ry, _llyfrgell_, _llyfrgrawn_

Li-cen-tious, _penrydd_, _afreolus_

Lieu-ten-ant, _rhaglaw_

Lig-a-ment, _rhwymyn_, _gïeuyn_

Like-li-hood, _tebygoliaeth_

Lin-e-age, _ach_, _llinach_, _hil_

Liq-uid-ate, _toddi_; _lleihau_

Lit-er-al, _llythrenol_

Lit-ur-gy, _gweddi_, _ffurf o weddiau_

Live-li-hood, _bywiolaeth_, _cynnaliaeth_

Log-a-rithm, _dirprwyn_

Lo-gi-cian, _rhesymegwr_, _dadleuydd_

Lon-gi-tude, _hirder_, _hydred_

Lo-qua-cious, _siaradus_, _tafodrydd_

Lot-ter-y, _cwtws_; _damweiniaeth_

Love-li-ness, _hawddgar_

Lov-ing-ly, _yn hawddgar_

Loy-al-ty, _ffyddlondeb_, _cywiredd_

Lu-cra-tive, _ennillfawr_, _maelfawr_

Lu-di-crous, _digrifol_, _ysmala_

Lum-ba-go, _llwynwst_

Lu-min-ous, _goleu_, _goleufawr_

Lu-na-cy, _lloerawl_, _lleuadol_

Lu-na-tic, _lloerigyn_; _lloerig_

Lux-u-ry, _gloddest_, _rhysedd_

Mac-er-ate, _teneuäu_; _mwydo_

Mag-a-zine, _arfdy_, _ystordy_

Ma-gi-cian, _swynwr_, _dewin_

Mag-is-trate, _swyddog_, _heddynad_

Mag-ni-fy, _mawrygu_, _mwyhau_

Mag-ni-tude, _maint_, _mawrdra_

Maid-ser-vant, _gwasanaethferch_

Main-te-nance, _cynnaliaeth_

Ma-jes-ty, _mawrhydi_

Mal-a-dy, _clefyd_, _dolur_

Mal-con-tent, _gwrthryfelwr_; _anfoddog_

Ma-li-cious, _cenfigenus_, _dygasog_

Ma-lig-nant, _athryfgar_, _anianddrwg_

Man-a-cle, _llawhual_, _llawethar_

Man-age-ment, _llywiadaeth_, _trefniad_

Man-a-ger, _trefnwr_, _rheolwr_

Man-ci-pate, _caethiwo_; _trosi meddiant_

Man-i-fest, _elgur_, _goleu_: _amlygu_, _dangos_

Man-i-fold, _amryw_, _aml_, _lluosog_

Man-ner-ly, _moesog_, _moesgar_

Ma-nœu-vre, _dyfais_, _cyfrwyswaith_

Man-slaugh-ter, _dynladdiad_

Man-u-al, _llawlyfr_, _perthynol i'r llaw_

Man-u-script, _ysgrifen_; _ysgrifwaith_

Mar-i-time, _morawl_, _arfor_

Mar-in-er, _morwr_, _llongwr_

Mar-tyr-dom, _merthyrdod_

Mar-vel-ous, _rhyfeddol_, _aruthrol_

Mas-cu-line, _gwryw_; _dynol_

Mas-sa-cre, _galanasdra_: _cigyddio_

Mas-ter-ly, _trachywrain_; _meistrawl_

Mas-ti-cate, _dygnoi_, _cnoi_

Ma-ter-nal, _mamaidd_, _mamawl_

Mat-ri-cide, _mamladdiad_

Me-an-der, _dolystumio_; _dolenu_

Meas-ure-ment, _meidraeth_, _mesuriant_

Me-chan-ic, _gallofydd_, _celfyddydwr_; _gallofyddol_, _llawweithiol_

Me-di-ate, _cyfryngol_; _canolaidd_; _cyfryngu_, _eiriol_

Med-i-cal, _meddygol_, _meddyginiaethol_

Med-i-cine, _meddyginiaeth_

Med-i-tate, _myfyrio_, _meddylio_

Me-di-um, _cyfrwng_; _y canol_

Mel-o-dy, _peroriaeth_, _melysgerdd_

Mem-o-ry, _côf_; _coffadwriaeth_

Men-di-cant, _cardotyn_; _cardotlyd_: _cardota_

Me-ni-al, _gwas_, _gweinidog_; _teuluaidd_

Mer-can-tile, _marchnadol_, _masnachol_

Mer-chan-dize, _masnachyddiaeth_: _masnachu_

Mer-ci-ful, _trugarog_, _tosturiol_

Mer-cu-ry, _Mercher_; _arian byw_

Mer-cy-seat, _trugareddfa_

Mer-ri-ly, _yn llawen_, _yn ddifyrlon_

Mer-ri-ment, _llawenydd_, _digrifwch_

Mes-sen-ger, _cenad_, _negesydd_

Met-a-phor, _traws-symmudiad_

Me-te-or, _awyrdân_, _goruchionen_

Mi-cro-scope, _chwyddwydr_

Mid-sum-mer, _canol haf_, _alban hefin_

Mi-gra-tion, _mudiad_, _symmudiad_

Mi-li-tia, _meiwyr_

Min-er-al, _mŵn_, _mettel_; _mwnawl_

Min-ia-ture, _mân ddarlun_

Min-is-ter, _gweinidog_: _gweini_

Min-is-try, _gweinidogaeth_; _gweinidogion_

Mi-nute-ness, _manylrwydd_

Mir-a-cle, _gwyrth_, _rhyfeddod_

Mis-ap-ply, _cambriodoli_, _camarfer_

Mis-be-have, _camymddwyn_

Mis-chiev-ous, _diriad_, _drygionus_

Mis-er-y, _trueni_, _adfyd_; _gofid_

Mis-for-tune, _anffawd_, _anhap_

Mit-i-gate, _esmwythau_, _lliniaru_

Mod-er-ate, _cymmedrol_, _canolig_: _cymmedroli_; _arafu_

Mod-est-y, _gwylder_, _lledneisrywdd_

Mod-i-fy, _dullio_, _agweddu_

Mod-u-late, _cyweirio llais_

Moi-e-ty, _hanner_, _hannerig_

Mo-ment-ous, _pwysfawr_, _pwysig_

Mo-ment-um, _egni_; _rhuthr_, _gorfod_

Mon-arch-y, _unbenaeth_, _breniniaeth_

Mon-i-tor, _rhybyddiwr_; _cynghorwr_

Mon-u-ment, _cofgolfn_; _beddadail_

Mor-al-ly, _yn foesol_; _yn debygol_

More-o-ver, _ym mhellach_; _heblaw_, _hefyd_

Mor-tal-ly, _yn farwol_, _yn angeuol_

Mort-ga-gee, _arwystlwr_, _echwynwr_

Mor-ti-fy, _marwlygru_, _darostwng_

Moth-er-ly, _mamaidd_, _mamawl_

Mo-tion-less, _digyffro_, _disymmud_

Mov-a-ble, _symmudadwy_

Moun-tain-eer, _mynyddwr_

Mount-ain-ous, _mynyddig_

Mu-ci-lage, _sudd_; _llysnafedd_

Mul-ti-ply, _lliosi_, _lliosogi_

Mul-ti-tude, _lliaws_, _tyrfa_

Mur-der-ous, _llofruddiog_, _gwaedlyd_

Mu-sic-al, _cerddgar_, _cynghaneddol_

Mu-si-cian, _cerddor_, _cynghaneddwr_, _tantwr_

Mu-ta-ble, _anwadal_, _cyfnewidiol_

Mu-ta-tion, _newidiad_, _cyfnewidiad_

Mu-ti-late, _anafu_, _hacru_, _efryddu_

Mu-ti-ny, _terfysg_: _terfysgu_, _gwrthgodi_

Mu-tu-al, _cy_, _cyd_, _cyf_

Mys-ter-y, _dirgelwch_; _cyfriniaeth_

Na-ked-ness, _noethni_, _llymdra_

Nar-ra-tion, _traethiad_, _adroddiad_, _hanes_

Na-tion-al, _cenedlol_; _gwladol_

Nat-u-ral, _anianol_, _naturiol_

Nav-i-gate, _mordwyo_, _llongiadu_

Ne-ga-tion, _nag_, _nacad_, _gwad_

Ne-ga-tive, _nag_, _negyf_: _nacau_, _gomedd_

Neg-lect-ful, _diofal_, _esgeulus_

Neg-li-gence, _anofaledd_, _esgeulusdod_

Neg-li-gent, _esgeulus_, _diofal_

Nerv-ous-ness, _grymusder_; _gwendid_

News-pa-per, _newyddor_, _newyddiadur_

No-bod-y, _neb_, _neb un_, _undyn_

No-ble-man, _dyledawg_, _pendefig_

Noc-tur-nal, _nosddeial_; _nosawl_

No-mad-ic, _bugeiliol_; _crwydrol_

Nom-in-al, _enwawl_; _galwedigol_

Nom-in-ate, _enwi_; _galw_; _penodi_

Non-pa-reil, _peth digymhar_; _argrafflythrenau_

Not-a-ble, _nodadwy_, _hynod_; _gofalus_

No-ti-fy, _hysbyu_, _cyhoeddi_

Nour-ish-ment, _maeth_, _meithriniaeth_, _ymborth_

Nov-el-ty, _newydd-der_, _newydd-dra_

No-vem-ber, _Tachwedd_

Nu-mer-al, _niferol_, _rhifol_

Nu-mer-ate, _rhifianu_, _rhifnodi_

Nu-mer-ous, _rhifiog_, _lliosog_

Nurs-er-y, _maethdy_; _planigfa_

Nu-tri-ment, _maeth_, _lluniaeth_

Nu-tri-tion, _maeth_, _maethiad_

Ob-du-rate, _calongaled_, _anhyblyg_

Ob-e-lisk, _berna_; _bernod_

Ob-jec-tion, _gwrthddadl_, _gwrtheb_

Ob-jec-tive, _gwrthrychawl_

Ob-la-tion, _offrwm_; _rhodd_

Ob-nox-ious, _darostyngiedig_, _beius_

Ob-serv-ance, _parch_; _cadwad_

Ob-so-lete, _anarferedig_, _henaidd_

Ob-sta-cle, _rhwystr_, _attalfa_

Ob-sti-nate, _cildyn_, _cyndyn_, _gwrthnysig_

Ob-struc-tion, _rhwystr_, _lludd_; _tagfa_

Ob-vi-ate, _rhagflaenu_; _rhagod_

Ob-vi-ous, _amlwg_, _eglur_

Oc-ca-sion, _achlysur_; _achos_: _peru_, _achosi_

Oc-cu-py, _meddiannu_; _dal_; _trin_; _defnyddio_

Oc-cur-rence, _damwain_, _dygwyddiad_

Oc-ta-gon, _wythochr_

Oc-ta-vo, _llyfr wythblyg_; _wythblyg_

Oc-to-ber, _Hydref_

O-di-ous, _cas_, _atgas_; _brwnt_

Of-fen-sive, _atgas_, _ffiaidd_; _rhwystrol_

Of-fer-ing, _aberth_, _offrwm_; _offrymiad_

Of-fi-cer, _swyddwr_, _swyddol_

Of-fi-cial, _is-swyddog_; _swyddol_

O-mis-sion, _esgeulusiad_; _gwall_

Om-nis-cience, _hollwybodaeth_

Om-nis-cient, _hollwybodus_

On-er-ous, _llwythfawr_, _trwm_

O-pen-ly, _ar gyhoedd_, _yn amlwg_

Op-er-ate, _gweithredu_; _effeithio_

O-pin-ion, _tyb_, _meddwl_; _mympwy_

Op-pon-ent, _gwrthwynebwr_; _gwrthwynebol_

Op-por-tune, _prydlawn_; _addas_

Op-po-site, _gwrthwyneb_; _cyferbyn_

Op-pres-sion, _gorthrymder_, _gormes_

Op-pres-sive, _gorthrymus_, _treisiawl_

Op-pres-sor, _gorthyrmwr_, _gormeswr_

Op-ta-tive, _dymunedigol_; _dymunadwy_

Op-u-lence, _cyfoeth_, _golud_

Op-u-lent, _cyfoethog_, _goludog_

Or-a-cle, _arma_; _gwr doeth_

Or-a-tion, _araeth_, _arawd_, _parabl_

Or-a-tor, _areithiwr_; _ymadroddwr_

Or-der-ly, _rheolaidd_, _trefnus_, _gweddaidd_

Or-di-nance, _deddf_, _cyfraith_; _rheol_; _gosodiad_

Or-di-nate, _trefnus_: _trefnu_

Or-gan-ic, _organaidd_; _offerynol_

O-ri-ent, _dwyrain_; _dysglaer_

Or-i-gin, _henydd_; _dechreu_; _gwreiddyn_

Or-na-ment, _addurn_; _harddwch_: _addurno_

Or-tho-dox, _iawnffyddiog_, _uniawngred_

Oth-er-wise, _amgen_, _onide_, _yn wrthwyneb_

O-ver-board, _tros y bwrdd_, _i'r mor_

O-ver-cast, _rhy dafl_; _cymylu_

O-ver-charge, _gorlwytho_; _gorofyn_

O-ver-come, _gorchfygu_, _gorchafu_

O-ver-flow, _arlanw_; _gormodedd_: _gorddylifo_

O-ver-head, _yn uchel_, _uchben_

O-ver-lay, _arlethu_, _gorwedd ar_; _gorchuddio_

O-ver-look, _gorwylio_, _goruchwylio_; _esgeuluso_

O-ver-plus, _sarid_, _gwarged_, _rhelyw_

O-ver-sight, _amryfusedd_; _arolygiaeth_

O-ver-spread, _gordaenu_, _gorchwalu_, _gorchuddio_; _taenu_

O-ver-take, _gorddiwedd_, _gorddiwes_, _dal_

O-ver-throw, _dadymchweliad_: _dymchwel_

O-ver-whelm, _gorwasgu_, _llethu_,

Out-ra-geous, _drygwyllt_, _ffyrnig_

Out-ward-ly, _yn allanol_, _oddi allan_

Pa-ci-fy, _dyhuddo_, _tawelu_

Pain-ful-ness, _poenusrwydd_

Pal-a-tine, _breiniog_

Pal-i-sade, _palis_, _gwalc_: _palisio_, _cledrgau_

Pal-pa-ble, _hydeiml_, _eglur_, _amlwg_

Pal-pi-tate, _dychlamu_; _curo_

Par-a-ble, _dammeg_, _ammeg_

Par-a-dise, _paradwys_, _gwynfa_, _nef_

Par-a-dox, _amrydyb_, _amgendyb_

Par-a-graph, _gwahanran_

Par-al-lax, _amgenedigaeth_

Par-al-lel, _cyfochriad_, _cyfatebiad_; _cyfochrol_: _cyfochri_

Par-a-mount, _goruchel_, _uchaf_, _penaf_

Par-a-mour, _cariadfab_, _cariadferch_

Par-a-pet, _canllawfur_, _gwalcfur_

Par-a-phrase, _allair_: _aralleirio_

Pa-rent-al, _rhieniawl_

Par-lia-ment, _senedd_, _seneddr_

Par-tak-er, _cyfranog_, _cyfranogwr_

Par-tial-ly, _yn dueddgar_; _o ran_

Par-ti-cle, _arsill_; _mymryn_; _tip_

Par-ti-tion, _rhaniad_; _canolfur_: _rhanu_

Part-ner-ship, _cyfrannogaeth_, _cydhawiaeth_

Pas-sa-ble, _hyffordd_; _derbyniol_

Pas-sen-ger, _teithydd_, _tramwywr_

Pas-sion-ate, _hyddig_, _nwydwyllt_; _traserchus_

Pass-o-ver, _Y Pasc_

Pas-to-ral, _bugeilgerdd_; _bugeiliaidd_

Pat-en-tee, _braint-lythyrog_

Pat-ri-arch, _prifdad_, _patriarch_

Pat-ron-age, _tadogaeth_; _nawdd_

Pay-a-ble, _dyledus_, _taladwy_

Peace-a-ble, _heddychlawn_; _dystaw_

Pec-to-ral, _dwyfronawl_, _cyllaol_

Pe-cul-iar, _priod_, _priodol_; _enwedigol_

Ped-es-tal, _bôn colofn_

Ped-i-gree, _âch_, _achwedd_

Pel-lu-cid, _tryloyw_, _gloyw_, _claer_

Pen-al-ty, _poen_, _cosp_; _dirwy_

Pen-du-lum, _dibynai_, _dringlyn_

Pen-e-trate, _treiddio_; _amgyffred_

Pen-i-tence, _edifeirwch_, _edifeiriant_

Pen-i-tent, _edifar_, _edifarus_

Pen-man-ship, _ysgrifen ddawn_

Pen-ny-worth, _ceiniogwerth_

Pen-sion-er, _gwobrwas_, _cyflogddyn_

Pen-ta-gon, _pumochr_

Pen-te-cost, _y pentecost_; _y Sulgwyn_

Pen-u-ry, _tlodi_, _anghen_

Per-cep-tion, _gwelediad_; _syniad_

Per-cep-tive, _gwelediannol_; _syniol_

Per-cus-sion, _tarawiad_, _ergydiad_

Per-di-tion, _colledigaeth_, _dystryw_

Per-fec-tion, _perffeithdra_

Per-fect-ly, _yn berffaithgwbl_

Per-fid-ious, _twyllgar_, _bradwrus_

Per-fo-rate, _tyllu_; _trydyllu_

Per-for-mance, _cyflawniad_; _chware_

Per-form-er, _cyflawnwr_, _chwarëydd_

Per-il-ous, _peryglus_, _enbyd_

Pe-ri-od, _gwers_; _cyfnod_; _diweddnod_

Per-ish-ing, _hylwgr_; _darfodedig_

Per-ma-nence, _parhad_

Per-ma-nent, _parhaus_, _sefydlog_

Per-mis-sion, _caniatâd_, _goddefiad_

Per-ni-cious, _niweidiol_, _dinystriol_

Per-pe-trate, _drygweithredu_, _cyflafanu_

Per-qui-site, _adfael_

Per-se-cute, _erlid_, _erlyn_

Per-se-vere, _parhau_, _para_; _dyfal bara_; _aros_

Per-son-al, _dynsodawl_; _personnol_; _perthynol i_

Per-son-ate, _dynwared_; _cynnyrcholi_

Per-spec-tive, _golygawl_, _trylwg_

Per-ti-nence, _cyfaddasrwydd_

Per-ti-nent, _perthynasol_, _cymhwys_

Per-u-sal, _tryddarlleniad_, _darlleniad_

Pes-ti-lence, _heintnod_, _y pla_

Pes-ti-lent, _heintnodawl_, _heintus_

Pe-ti-tion, _erfyniad_, _deiseb_: _erfynio_, _deisyf_

Pet-ri-fy, _caregu_

Pet-u-lance, _crygnaws_; _coegni_

Pet-u-lant, _anniddig_, _anfoddog_

Phar-ma-cy, _cyfferiaeth_

Phys-i-cal, _meddygol_; _anianyddol_

Phy-si-cian, _meddyg_, _meddygydd_

Pi-e-ty, _duwiolfryd_, _duwioldeb_

Pil-grim-age, _pererindod_

Pi-lot-age, _llywiedyddiaeth_

Pin-na-cle, _pinagl_, _uchelfaen_

Pi-ra-cy, _morladrad_, _morysbail_

Pit-e-ous, _truenus_, _tostûrus_

Pit-i-ful, _tosturus_; _gresynol_

Plant-a-tion, _planfa_, _planigfa_

Plas-ter-er, _cymrydwr_, _plastrwr_

Plaud-a-ble, _canmoladwy_, _clodadwy_

Plaus-i-ble, _ymddangosiadus_; _golygus_; _tybygol_

Play-fel-low, _cydchwarëydd_

Plen-te-ous, _llawn_, _helaethlawn_

Plen-ti-ful, _helaeth_, _cyflawn_

Pli-a-ble, _ystwyth_, _hyblyg_

Plun-der-er, _anrheithiwr_, _ysbeiliwr_

Po-et-ry, _awenyddiaeth_, _barddoniaeth_

Poi-son-ous, _gwenwynig_, _gwenwynllyd_

Pol-i-cy, _llywodraethyddiaeth_; _callineb_; _ysgrifen digollediad_

Po-lite-ness, _moesgarwch_, _hyfoesedd_

Pol-it-ic, _cyfrwysgall_; _gwladol_

Pol-it-ics, _llywod-ddysg_, _gwledychddysg_

Pol-lu-tion, _halogiad_, _aflanad_

Pol-y-gon, _amryochr_

Pop-u-lace, _y cyffredin_, _y werin_

Pop-u-lar, _poblogaidd_; _gwerinaidd_

Port-a-ble, _dygadwy_, _hyddwyn_

Port-er-age, _cyflog cludydd_

Port-fol-io, _papyrgwd_

Port-man-teau, _bolgan_; _ysgilgist_

Po-si-tion, _cyflead_, _gosodiad_; _sefyllfa_

Pos-i-tive, _gwiriawl_; _sicr_, _penodol_

Pos-ses-sion, _meddiant_, _perchenogaeth_

Pos-ses-sive, _perchenawl_, _meddawl_

Pos-ses-sor, _meddianydd_; _perchen_

Pos-si-ble, _galluadwy_; _posibl_

Pos-si-bly, _efallai_; _ysgatfydd_

Post-of-fice, _llythyrdy_, _llythyrfa_

Po-ten-tate, _penadur_, _archdeyrn_

Po-ten-tial, _galluogol_, _galluadwy_

Pot-ter-y, _crochenyddiaeth_

Pov-er-ty, _tlodi_, _anghen_, _eisiau_

Poul-ter-er, _adarwerthwr_

Pow-er-ful, _galluog_, _nerthol_

Prac-ti-cal, _ymarferol_, _defnyddiol_

Praise-wor-thy, _canmoladwy_

Pre-cau-tion, _rhagocheliad_: _rhagrybyddio_

Pre-ce-dence, _blaenoriaeth_, _y blaen_

Pre-ce-dent, _cynreol_; _blaenorol_

Prec-i-pice, _dibyn_, _diffwys_

Pre-cis-ion, _manylrwydd_

Pre-cise-ly, _yn fanwl_

Pre-cur-sor, _blaenrhed_, _rhagflaenor_

Pred-i-cate, _adroddawl_, _darddelw_: _darddodi_, _rhagadrodd_

Pre-dic-tion, _rhagddywediad_

Pre-ex-ist, _cynhanfodi_, _cynfodi_

Pref-er-ence, _rhagoriaeth_, _blaenoriaeth_

Pre-fer-ment, _dyrchafiad_, _codiad_

Pre-ju-dice, _rhagfarn_: _niweidio_

Pre-ma-ture, _rhagaddfed_, _rhygynar_

Prem-i-ses, _cyseiliau_, _cysoddedigion_

Pre-mi-um, _gwobr_, _gobr_

Pres-by-ter, _penaduriad_, _hynefydd_

Pre-scrip-tion, _rhagysgrifen_; _cyfarwyddiad_

Pre-serv-er, _cynnaliwr_, _diogelwr_

Pres-i-dent, _arlywydd_, _llywydd_

Pre-sump-tion, _tybygiad_; _beiddiad_

Pre-sump-tive, _tybiadol_; _trahaus_

Pre-tend-er, _ffuantwr_, _twyllhonwr_

Pre-ten-sion, _rhith-hawliad_

Pre-vail-ing, _ffyniannus_, _tyciol_

Prev-a-lence, _ffyniant_, _goruchafiaeth_

Prev-a-lent, _gorchfygawl_, _ffynawl_

Pre-ven-tion, _rhagflaeniad_; _lluddiad_

Pre-ven-tive, _cadwedydd_, _rhagflaenydd_; _rhagflaenedigol_

Pre-vi-ous, _blaenorol_, _rhag blaen_, _cyn_

Pri-ma-ry, _prif_, _cysefin_, _gwreiddiol_; _cyntaf_

Prim-i-tive, _cyntefig_, _cysefin_; _prif_

Prin-ci-pal, _pen_, _blaenor_; _prif_, _penaf_

Prin-ci-ple, _egwyddor_; _gosodedigaeth_: _egwyddori_; _dysgu_

Pri-va-cy, _dirgelwch_; _cyfrinach_

Pri-va-teer, _herwlong_

Priv-i-lege, _braint_, _gorfraint_: _breinio_

Priv-i-ly, _yn ddirgel_, _tan gel_

Prob-a-ble, _tebyg_, _credadwy_, _hygoel_

Pro-ba-tion, _prawf_, _profiad_

Pro-ced-ure, _hwyliad_, _gyriad_

Pro-ceed-ing, _gweithrediad_, _gorchwyl_

Pro-ces-sion, _gorymdaith_, _torfdrefnus_

Prod-i-gal, _afradlawn_, _dyfethgar_

Pro-dig-ious, _aruthrol_, _dirfawr_; _rhyfeddol_

Pro-duc-tion, _cynnyrchiad_; _estyniad_

Pro-duc-tive, _cynnyrchiol_; _ffrwythiannus_

Pro-fane-ness, _halogrwydd_; _llygredigaeth_

Pro-fes-sion, _proffesiad_; _galwedigaeth_

Pro-fes-sor, _proffeswr_; _cadeirdraw_

Pro-fi-cience, _cynnydd_; _gwelliant_

Pro-fi-cient, _un cynnyddedig_; _graddwr_

Prof-li-gate, _oferddyn_; _anfad_, _dirinwedd_

Pro-fu-sion, _gorhaeledd_, _gormodedd_

Prog-e-ny, _hil_, _epil_

Pro-gres-sion, _mynediad ym mlaen_; _graddiant_, _cynnyddiad_

Pro-gres-sive, _graddringawl_, _graddol_

Pro-hib-it, _gwarafun_, _gwahardd_

Pro-jec-tile, _tafledigydd_, _taflbeth_; _hydafl_, _tafl_

Pro-jec-tion, _ergydiad_, _cynlluniad_; _ysgwyddiad_

Pro-lif-ic, _hiliog_, _epiliog_, _ffrwythlawn_

Prom-e-nade, _rhodfa_, _rhodfa awelaidd_

Prom-i-nence, _ysgwyddiad allan_, _crogiad allan_; _bargodle_

Prom-i-nent, _bargodawl_, _eglur_; _amlycaf_

Prom-is-ing, _gobeithlawn_, _gobeithiol_

Pro-mo-tion, _dyrchafiad_, _codiad_

Promp-ti-tude, _parodrwydd_; _hyfedredd_

Pro-mul-gate, _cyhoeddi_, _adrodd hysbysu_

Prop-a-gate, _epilio_, _cenedlu_, _lluosogi_

Prop-er-ly, _yn briodol_, _yn addas_

Prop-er-ty, _cynneddf_, _priodolder_; _eiddo_, _meddiant_

Proph-e-cy, _prophwydoliaeth_

Proph-e-sy, _prophwydo_, _rhagfynegi_

Pro-pi-tious, _tosturiol_, _graslawn_; _ffafriol_

Pro-por-tion, _cyfran_, _dogn_; _cyfartalwch_: _cymmedroli_; _cyweirio_

Pros-e-cute, _arganlyn_, _dilyn_, _erlyn_, _erlid_

Pros-e-lyte, _dychwelwr_: _dychwelyd_

Pros-o-dy, _mydryddiaeth_; _acenyddiaeth_

Pro-spec-tus, _rhagdremyn_

Pros-per-ous, _llwyddiannus_, _hylwydd_

Pros-ti-tute, _putain_: _puteinio_

Pros-tra-tion, _gorchreiniad_, _iseliad_

Pro-tec-tion, _amddiffyniad_, _nodded_

Pro-tec-tor, _amddiffynydd_

Prot-es-tant, _gwrthdystiwr_; _ardystiwr_

Pro-to-col, _cynysgrif_

Pro-trac-tion, _gohiriad_, _oediad_

Pro-tru-sion, _gwithiad ym mlaen_

Prov-a-ble, _profadwy_, _hybrawf_

Prov-en-der, _ebran_, _porthiant_

Prov-i-dence, _rhagwelediad_, _rhagluniaeth_

Prov-i-dent, _darbodus_; _cynghorus_

Pro-vin-cial, _taleithben_; _taleithiol_, _gwladol_

Pro-vi-sion, _arlwy_, _lluniaeth_; _darpariaeth_

Prox-i-mate, _nesaf_, _agosaf_, _digyfrwng_

Pru-den-tial, _cynghorus_, _call_

Pub-lish-er, _cyhoeddwr_; _adroddwr_

Pu-gil-ist, _dyrnodiwr_, _paffiwr_

Pug-na-cious, _ymladdgar_

Pul-mon-ic, _ysgyfain_, _ysgyfeinglaf_

Pul-sa-tion, _curiad_; _ysbongciad_

Pul-ver-ize, _llychu_, _malu_

Punc-tu-al, _geirwir_; _manol_; _gofalus_

Pun-ish-ment, _cosp_, _cospedigaeth_

Pur-ga-tive, _carthai_; _carthedigol_

Pu-ri-fy, _coethi_, _puro_

Pu-ri-ty, _purdeb_, _puredd_

Pur-loin-er, _darnguddiwr_

Pur-su-ance, _canlyniad_, _erlyniad_

Pur-vey-ance, _porthmonaeth_

Pu-tre-fy, _braenu_, _pydru_

Pu-tres-cence, _malldod_, _pydredd_

Pu-tres-cent, _braenllyd_, _llygredig_

Pu-trid-ness, _braenedd_

Pyr-a-mid, _bera_

Quad-ran-gle, _pedror_, _pedrongl_: _pedrongli_

Quad-rat-ic, _pedryradd_, _pedraidd_

Quad-ru-ped, _pedwartroed_

Quad-ru-ple, _pedwarplyg_

Qual-i-fy, _addasu_, _cymhwyso_

Qual-i-ty, _cynneddf_; _rhinwedd_; _ansawdd_; _rhywogaeth_

Quan-ti-ty, _swm_, _maint_

Quar-an-tine, _diheinbrawf_

Quar-rel-some, _cwerylus_, _cecrus_

Quar-ter-deck, _uchelfwrdd_, _pedryfwrdd_

Quar-ter-ing, _dofreithiad_; _llettyad_

Quar-ter-ly, _yn drimisol_

Quench-a-ble, _diffoddadwy_

Quest-ion-ing, _posiad_, _ymfoyniad_

Quick-sil-ver, _arian byw_

Qui-et-ness, _llonyddwch_, _tawelwch_

Quo-ta-tion, _dyfyniad_, _dyfynnodiad_

Ra-di-ance, _llewyrch_, _gloywder_

Ra-di-ant, _dysglaer_, _pelydrog_

Ra-di-ate, _pelydru_, _peilio_

Rad-i-cal, _gwreiddiol_, _cyn_, _cysefin_

Rad-i-cate, _gwreiddio_; _boneddogi_

Ra-di-us, _gwawlbaladr_, _hanner tryfesur_

Rag-ged-ness, _carpiogrwydd_

Rag-ing-ly, _yn gynddeiriog_, _yn ffyrnig_

Rail-ler-y, _difenwad_, _gwawdfeiad_, _gogan_

Ran-som-er, _prynwr_, _pryniadwr_

Ra-pa-cious, _rheibus_, _gwangcus_

Ra-pid-ly, _yn gyflym_, _yn fuan_

Rap-tu-rous, _perlewygawl_; _gorllawen_

Rar-e-fy, _teneuo_, _teneuaw_

Ras-cal-ly, _brwnt_, _gwael_, _dyhir_

Ra-tion-al, _rhesymol_, _arbwyllawg_

Rav-en-ous, _gorwangcus_, _cigfranawl_

Ra-vish-ment, _treisiant_; _gorlonedd_

Read-i-ly, _yn barod_, _yn ewyllysgar_

Read-i-ness, _parodrwydd_, _ewyllysgarwch_

Re-ad-mit, _aildderbyn_, _ad-dderbyn_

Re-al-ize, _gwirio_, _sylweddoli_; _gwirbrofi_

Re-al-ly, _yn wir_; _yn ddiau_

Re-as-cend, _adesgyn_

Rea-son-er, _rhesymwr_

Rea-son-ing, _rhesymiad_, _cymhwylliad_

Re-bate-ment, _rhigoliad_, _toliant_

Re-bell-ion, _gwrthryfel_

Re-bell-ious, _gwrthryfelgar_, _cyndyn_

Re-ceiv-er, _derbyniwr_, _derbynydd_

Re-cent-ly, _yn newydd_, _yn ddiweddar_

Re-cep-tion, _derbyniad_, _croesaw_

Re-cit-al, _adroddiad_, _datgan_

Re-cit-ing, _adroddiad_, _mynegiad_

Reck-on-ing, _cyfrifiant_, _cyfrif_

Re-cog-nize, _adwaen_, _adnabod_

Rec-ol-lect, _ailgynnull_, _adgofio_

Re-com-mence, _ailddechreu_

Rec-om-mend, _canmol_; _gorchymmyn_

Rec-om-pense, _atdal_, _tâl_, _taledigaeth_: _atdalu_, _gwobrwyo_

Rec-on-cile, _cymmodi_; _heddychu_

Re-cord-er, _cofiadur_, _cofrestrydd_

Re-cre-ate, _adfywio_, _adloni_

Rect-an-gle, _unionongl_, _cyfongl_

Rec-ti-fy, _unioni_, _diwygio_; _ad-ddystyllio_

Rec-ti-tude, _uniondeb_, _uniawnedd_

Rec-tor-y, _personiaeth_, _Persondy_

Re-cum-bent, _gorweddol_

Re-cur-rence, _dychweliad_, _adrediad_

Re-cur-rent, _dychweliadol_, _adgyrchiol_

Re-deem-er, _prynwr_, _gwaredwr_

Re-demp-tion, _pryniad_, _prynedigaeth_

Re-duc-tion, _goresgyniad_, _cwtogiad_

Re-dun-dance, _arddigonedd_, _gormodedd_

Re-dun-dant, _arddigonawl_, _gormodawl_

Re-em-bark, _adlongi_

Re-en-force, _adgyfnerthu_, _adrymuso_

Re-en-gage, _ailymrwymo_

Ref-er-ence, _cyfeiriad_, _golygiad_

Re-fine-ment, _coethiad_; _manyliant_

Re-flec-tion, _gwrthdafliad_; _adfyfyriad_

Re-flect-ive, _adlewyrchol_; _adfyfyriol_

Re-form-er, _diwygiwr_, _adffurfiwr_

Re-frac-tion, _dadlewyrch_; _gwrthdoriad_

Re-fract-ive, _gwrthdoredigol_

Re-fresh-ment, _adfywiad_, _lluniaeth_

Ref-u-gee, _ymnoddwr_, _ymnoddiedydd_

Re-fus-al, _pall_, _gomeddiad_

Re-gard-ful, _ystyriol_, _gofalus_

Re-gard-less, _anystyriol_, _diofal_

Re-gen-cy, _rhaglawiaeth_

Reg-i-cide, _teyrnladdiad_

Reg-i-men, _hwyl_, _rheoldrefn_; _trefniad ymborth_

Reg-i-ment, _catrawd_, _byddinrawd_

Reg-is-ter, _coflyfr_, _cofrestrwr_: _cofrestru_, _cofnodi_

Reg-is-trar, _cofrestrwr_

Reg-u-lar, _rheolaidd_, _trefnus_

Reg-u-late, _trefnu_, _rheoleiddio_

Re-hears-al, _adroddiad_, _datganiad_

Re-ject-ed, _gwrthodedig_, _llysedig_

Re-jec-tion, _gwrthodiad_, _llysiant_

Re-im-burse, _atdalu_, _talu yn ol_

Re-joic-ing, _llawenychiad_, _gorfoledd_, _llawenydd_

Re-la-tion, _adroddiad_, _mynegiad_; _perthynas_

Rel-a-tive, _perthynas_; _perthynasol_

Re-lent-less, _didosturi_, _caledgalon_

Re-li-ance, _golud_, _ymddiried_; _dibyniad_

Re-lig-ion, _crefydd_

Re-lig-ious, _crefyddol_

Re-lin-quish, _gadw_, _gadael_, _gollwng_

Rel-ish-ing, _archwaethiad_, _blasiad_

Re-luct-ance, _gwrthdyniad_, _anfodd_

Re-luct-ant, _anewyllysgar_, _anfoddog_

Re-main-der, _gweddill_, _rhan ar ol_; _gadawedig_

Rem-e-dy, _meddyginiaeth_, _gwelliant_

Re-mem-ber, _cofio_, _meddwl_; _adgoffa_

Re-mem-brance, _cof_, _adgof_; _coffadwriaeth_

Re-mis-sion, _maddeuant_, _dilead_

Re-mit-tance, _arian troslwydd_, _adanfoniad_; _maddeuant_

Re-mit-ting, _dyspeidiol_

Re-mon-strance, _adfynegiad_, _gwrthdystiad_

Re-mon-strate, _gwrthachwyn_, _gwrthresymu_

Re-mote-ness, _pellder_

Re-mov-al, _symmudiad_; _diswyddiad_

Ren-dez-vous, _ymgyrchfa_, _ymgasglfa_

Ren-e-gade, _gwrthgiliwr_

Re-new-al, _adnewyddiad_

Ren-o-vate, _adnewyddu_; _adferu_

Rent-a-ble, _ardrethadwy_

Re-pay-ment, _atdal_, _atdaliad_

Re-peat-er, _adroddwr_; _oriadur_

Re-pent-ance, _edifeirwch_, _edifeiriant_

Re-plen-ish, _diwallu_, _llenwi_

Re-port-er, _hysbyswr_, _mynegwr_

Rep-re-sent, _arddangos_, _cynnyrchioli_

Rep-ri-mand, _cerydd_: _ceryddu_

Re-proach-ful, _edliwgar_; _gwaradwyddus_

Rep-ro-bate, _drygddyn_: _gwrthod_

Re-pub-lic, _gweriniaeth_

Re-pug-nance, _gwrthwynebiad_

Re-pug-nant, _gwrthwyneb_, _croes_

Re-pul-sion, _gwrthyriad_

Re-pul-sive, _cilgwthiol_

Re-put-ed, _cyfrifedig_

Re-qui-site, _gofynedig_, _angenrheidiol_

Re-qui-sites, _angenrheidiau_

Re-quit-al, _gwobr_; _iawn_, _tâl_

Re-sem-blance, _cyffelybrwydd_

Re-sem-ble, _tebygu_, _cyffelybu_

Re-sent-ment, _atdeimlad_; _digter_

Res-er-voir, _cronfa_, _dyfrgist_

Res-i-dence, _arosfa_, _trigfa_, _cartref_

Res-i-dent, _trigiannydd_; _trigiannol_

Res-i-due, _gweddill_, _rhelyw_

Re-sist-ance, _gwrthwynebiad_

Re-solv-ent, _datodawl_

Res-o-lute, _llawnfrydig_, _bwriadlawn_

Re-spect-ful, _parchus_, _parchlawn_

Re-spec-tive, _neillduol_, _priodol_, _gwahanol_

Re-splen-dence, _atdywyniad_, _dysglaerder_

Re-splen-dent, _llewyrchol_, _ysblenydd_

Re-stric-tion, _attaliad_, _cyfyngiad_

Re-stric-tive, _terfynedigol_, _rhwymol_

Re-strin-gent, _rhwymydd_; _rhwymol_

Re-tain-er, _llogwr_; _dibynydd_

Re-ten-tion, _attaliad_, _cofddaliad_

Re-ten-tive, _attalgar_, _cynnwyssol_; _gafaelgar_

Ret-i-nue, _gosgordd_, _gosgorddlu_

Re-tire-ment, _neillduedd_, _unigedd_

Re-trench-ment, _cwtogiad_; _adglawdd_

Ret-ro-grade, _gwrthgrwydrol_

Ret-ro-spect, _gwrthedrych_, _adolwg_

Re-venge-ful, _dialgar_, _ymddialgar_

Rev-e-nue, _ardreth_, _cyllid_

Rev-er-ence, _parch_, _anrhydedd_: _perchi_, _parchu_

Rev-er-end, _parchedig_, _hybarch_

Rev-er-ent, _parchus_; _gostynedig_

Re-vers-al, _dymchweliad_, _diddymiad_

Re-ver-sion, _gwrthdroad_; _olyniad_

Re-vi-sion, _adchwyliad_, _ailolygiad_

Re-viv-al, _adfywiad_, _dadebriad_

Re-volv-ing, _amdroad_; _myfyriad_

Re-ward-ed, _gwobrwyedig_

Rhet-o-ric, _ffraetheb_, _areithyddeg_

Rheu-ma-tism, _cryd cymalau_, _cymalwsg_

Rid-i-cule, _gwawd_: _gwawdio_

Right-eous-ness, _cyfiawnder_, _uniondeb_

Rig-or-ous, _garw_, _gerwin_, _llymdost_

Ring-lead-er, _blaenor_, _penaeth_

Ri-ot-ous, _terfysgus_

Rit-u-al, _defodlyfr_; _defodol_

Ri-val-ry, _cydymgais_

Riv-u-let, _nant_, _cornant_

Ro-ga-tion, _gofyniad_, _gwedd_

Ro-man-tic, _aruthrol_; _ffugiol_

Ro-ta-tion, _chwyliad_, _chwyldroad_

Roy-al-ty, _brenindod_, _teyrnogaeth_

Ru-di-ment, _egwyddor_, _cynbrawf_

Ru-in-ate, _andwyo_, _andwyol_

Ru-in-ous, _adfeiliog_, _andwyol_

Ru-mi-nate, _adgnoi_; _adystyried_

Run-a-way, _ffoadur_, _cilgi_

Rus-ti-cate, _gwladogi_

Rust-i-ness, _llwydni_, _llwydrydni_

Sac-cha-rine, _siwgraidd_; _melys_

Sac-ra-ment, _sacrament_

Sa-cred-ness, _cysegredd_

Sac-ri-fice, _aberth_, _offrwm_: _aberthu_

Sac-ri-lege, _cysegrladrad_

Sa-ga-cious, _call_, _craff_, _synwyrol_

Sal-a-ry, _cyflog_, _tâlwobr_

Sale-a-ble, _gwerthadwy_

Sa-li-va, _aliw_, _poer_

Sal-i-vate, _haliwio_, _poerlif_

Sal-va-tion, _iachawdwriaeth_, _gwaredigaeth_

Sanc-ti-fy, _santeiddio_; _puro_

San-i-ty, _iechyd_, _dianmhwylled_

Sar-cas-tic, _gwawdus_, _brathgar_

Sa-ti-ate, _digoni_, _diwallu_

Sat-el-lite, _seren osgordd_, _lleuaden_

Sat-is-fy, _boddio_; _diwallu_

Sat-u-rate, _llenwi_, _digoni_

Sat-ur-day, _dydd Sadwrn_

Sav-age-ness, _gwylltineb_, _creulonedd_

Sau-ci-ness, _coegni_, _delder_

Scan-dal-ize, _gwaradwyddo_, _goganu_

Scan-dal-ous, _gwaradwyddus_, _gwarthus_

Scen-e-ry, _golygfa_, _darlunfa_

Scrip-tu-ral, _ysgrythyrol_

Scro-fu-la, _manwynion_

Scru-pu-lous, _ammheugar_

Scru-ti-nize, _adchwilio_

Scru-ti-ny, _olrhëawd_, _manwl chwiliad_

Sea-son-ing, _tymheriad_; _cywair_

Se-clu-sion, _cauad allan_, _ysgariad_

Se-cre-cy, _dirgelaidd_, _dirgelwch_

Sec-u-lar, _bydol_, _lleygol_

Se-date-ness, _arafwch_, _digyffroad_

Sed-i-ment, _gwaddod_, _gwaelod_

Se-di-tion, _terfysg_, _ymblaid_

Se-di-tious, _ymbleidgar_, _bradfwriadol_

Se-duc-tion, _hudiad_, _trawsddeniad_

Sed-u-lous, _dyfal_, _diwyd_, _llafurus_

Seem-ing-ly, _i'r golwg_, _mewn rhith_

Se-lec-tion, _detholiad_, _detholrif_

Self-con-ceit, _hunandyb_

Sen-a-tor, _seneddwr_, _henefydd_

Se-ni-or, _hynaf_, _hynefydd_

Sen-sa-tion, _syniad_, _teimlad_

Sen-si-ble, _teimladwy_; _deallus_

Sen-si-tive, _teimladol_; _byw_

Sen-su-al, _anianol_, _cnawdol_

Sen-ti-ment, _tyb_, _barn_, _meddwl_

Sen-ti-nel, _gwyliedydd_

Sep-a-rate, _gwahan_: _gwahanu_

Sep-tem-ber, _Medi_, _mis Medi_

Sep-ul-chre, _bedd_, _beddrod_

Se-ri-ous, _difrif_, _difrifol_

Ser-pen-tine, _sarphaidd_; _dolenog_

Ser-vi-tude, _caethwasanaeth_, _caethiwed_

Set-tle-ment, _sefydliad_, _preswylfod_

Sev-en-fold, _seithblyg_

Sev-er-al, _pwngc_, _pen_; _amryw_, _gwahanol_; _llawer_

Shal-low-ness, _basder_, _basedd_

Shel-ter-ing, _gwasgodiad_, _achlesiad_

Shiv-er-ing, _cryndod_; _dellteniad_

Sid-er-al, _serawl_

Sig-nal-ize, _hynodi_, _enwogi_, _arnodi_

Sig-na-ture, _arwyddnod_, _llaw ysgrifen_

Sig-ni-fy, _arwyddo_; _hysbysu_, _mynegi_

Silk-mer-cer, _sidanydd_

Sil-li-ness, _ffoledd_, _ynfydrwydd_

Sil-ver-smith, _arianof_, _gof arian_

Sim-i-lar, _tebyg_, _mal_, _cyffelyb_

Sim-i-le, _cymhariaeth_, _cyffelybiaeth_

Sim-ple-ton, _symylyn_, _hurtyn_

Sim-pli-fy, _symliaw_, _symlu_

Sin-cere-ly, _yn gywir_, _yn ddiffuant_

Sin-ful-ness, _pechadurusrwydd_

Sin-gle-ness, _symledd_, _symlrwydd_

Sin-gu-lar, _unigol_, _unig_; _hynod_, _neillduol_

Sin-is-ter, _aswy_, _chwith_; _annheg_

Sit-u-ate, _sefydlu_, _cyfleu_

Skel-e-ton, _ysgerbwd_, _esgrud_

Skil-ful-ness, _cywreinrwydd_, _hyfedredd_

Sky-rock-ets, _banbelau_, _tânbeleni_

Slan-der-ing, _athrodiad_, _abseniad_

Slan-der-ous, _enllibus_, _athrodus_

Slaugh-ter-house, _cigydd-dy_, _lladd-dy_

Slip-per-y, _llithrig_; _anhyddal_

Sloth-ful-ness, _diogi_, _musgrellni_

Slov-en-ly, _swga_, _annhaclus_; _dilun_; _yn anghryno_

So-ber-ness, _sobrwydd_; _difrifwch_

So-ci-al, _cymdeithgar_, _cyfeillgar_

Sol-em-nize, _difrifgadw_, _gweinyddu_

So-lic-it, _erfyn_, _crefu_

Sol-i-tude, _unigedd_, _ymneillduedd_

Sol-u-ble, _toddadwy_, _hydawdd_

So-lu-tion, _dattoddiad_; _egluriad_

Some-bod-y, _rhywun_

So-no-rous, _seinfawr_, _soniarus_

Sooth-say-er, _dewin_, _dewinwr_

Soph-is-try, _twyllresymiad_

Sor-cer-er, _swynwr_

Sor-cer-y, _swyngyfaredd_

Sor-row-ful, _trist_, _galarus_

Sov-er-eign, _penllywydd_; _penadur_; _goruchaf_, _goruchel_

South-er-ly, _deheuol_

Spe-cif-ic, _priodfeddyginiaeth_; _priodol_, _neillduol_

Spe-ci-fy, _penodi_, _gwahanodi_

Spe-ci-men, _rhagbrawf_, _cynrych_

Spec-ta-cle, _drych_, _golwg_

Spec-ta-cles, _tremwydr_, _syllwydr_

Spec-ta-tor, _edrychwr_, _syllydd_

Spec-u-late, _brydolygu_, _golygianu_

Spell-ing-book, _silliadur_

Spher-i-cal, _cyfrgrwn_

Spir-it-ed, _ysbrydlawn_, _gwrol_

Spite-ful-ness, _migusedd_, _dygasedd_

Spu-ri-ous, _ffugiol_, _bastarddaidd_

Sta-ble-ness, _diysgogrwydd_

Staff-bear-er, _brysgyllddygydd_

Stag-na-tion, _croniad_, _llyniad_

Sta-tion-er, _safwerthydd_, _gwerthwr papyr_

Stead-fast-ly, _yn ddianwadal_, _yn ddiysgog_

Stead-fast-ness, _dianwadalwch_

Step-fath-er, _llysdad_

Step-moth-er, _llysfam_

Stiff-neck-ed, _gwargaled_, _gwarsyth_

Stig-ma-tize, _senwi_, _gwrthnodi_

Stim-u-late, _symbylu_; _annog_, _cymhell_

Stim-u-lus, _cymhellai_

Stin-gi-ness, _crintachrwydd_

Stip-u-late, _ammodi_; _cytuno_

Stom-ach-er, _bronfoll_, _dwyfroneg_

Strat-a-gem, _ystrangc_, _ystryw_, _dichell_

Straw-ber-ry, _myfien_, _mefusen_

Stren-u-ous, _bywiog_, _ymdrechgar_

Stub-born-ness, _cyndynrwydd_

Stu-di-ous, _llengar_, _myfyrgar_; _diwyd_

Stum-bling-block, _cyff_, _maen tramgwydd_

Stu-pen-dous, _aruthrol_, _rhyfeddol_

Stu-pi-fy, _hurtio_, _syfrdanu_

Stut-ter-ing, _attalddywediad_

Sub-al-tern, _is swyddog_; _is_, _tan_

Sub-di-vide, _adranu_, _dyranu_

Sub-jec-tion, _gwarogaeth_; _ymostyngiad_

Sub-ju-gate, _gwarogi_, _darostwng_

Sub-mis-sion, _ymostyngiad_

Sub-mis-sive, _gostyngedig_, _isel_

Sub-poe-na, _gwyslythr_: _dyfnrwymo_

Sub-scrib-er, _tanysgrifydd_, _cynnorthwywr_

Sub-scrip-tion, _tanysgrifiad_

Sub-se-quent, _canlynol_, _gwedi_, _dilynol_

Sub-si-dy, _arian cymhorth_; _porth-dâl_

Sub-sist-ence, _cynnaliaeth_, _bywioliaeth_; _para_, _arosiad_

Sub-stan-tial, _sylweddol_; _defnyddiol_

Sub-stan-tive, _sylweddair_; _sylweddol_

Sub-sti-tute, _dirprwywr_

Sub-ter-fuge, _gochelfa_; _cyfrwys ocheliad_

Sub-trac-tion, _tyniad allan_, _erthyniaeth_

Sub-til-ty, _minder_, _cyfrwys_

Suc-cess-ful, _llwyddianus_

Suc-ces-sion, _olyniad_, _dilyniad_

Suc-ces-sive, _olynol_, _dilynedigol_

Suc-ces-sor, _olynol_, _dilynydd_

Sud-den-ness, _disymwythdra_

Suf-fer-ance, _goddefiad_; _amynedd_

Suf-fer-er, _dyoddefydd_, _goddefwr_

Suf-fer-ing, _goddefiad_, _dyoddefiant_

Suf-fi-cient, _digon_, _digonol_

Suf-fo-cate, _mygu_, _tagu_

Sug-ges-tion, _crybwylliad_, _amnaid_

Suit-a-ble, _cyfaddas_, _cydweddol_, _addas_

Sul-phur-ous, _brwmstanaidd_

Sum-ma-ry, _crynodeb_; _byr_, _cryno_

Sump-tu-ous, _mawrwych_; _costfawr_

Su-per-fice, _wyneb_, _arwyneb_

Su-per-fine, _meinwych_; _goreu_

Su-per-sede, _diswyddo_: _troi heibio_

Su-per-vise, _gorucholygu_

Sup-ple-ment, _adchwanegiad_

Sup-pli-cate, _erfyn_, _gweddio_, _achrefu_

Sup-port-er, _cynnaliwr_; _attegydd_

Sup-pres-sion, _diddymiad_, _llethiad_

Sup-pres-sive, _celiadol_, _llethiadol_

Sur-cin-gle, _argengl_, _uchgengl_

Sur-feit-ing, _alariad_, _glythineb_; _tra ffiaidd_

Sur-ger-y, _llawfeddygaeth_

Sur-pris-ing, _rhyfeddol_, _aruthrawl_

Sur-ren-der, _rhoddiad i fynu_; _traddodi_, _ymroddi_

Sur-ro-gate, _rhaglaw esgob_

Sur-round-ing, _amgylchynol_, _cylchynol_

Sur-vey-or, _arolygydd_; _mesurydd_

Sur-viv-or, _gorfucheddwr_

Sus-pect-ing, _drwgdybus_, _amheus_

Sus-pen-sion, _crogiad_; _dodiad heibio_

Sus-pi-cion, _drwgdyb_; _amheuad_

Sus-pi-cious, _drwgdybus_, _amheugar_

Sus-te-nance, _ymborth_, _cynnaliaeth_

Syl-la-ble, _sill_, _sillaf_, _silleb_

Syl-la-bus, _crynnydeb_; _penau_

Sym-me-try, _cymesuredd_; _cyfatebiad_

Sym-pa-thize, _cyd-ddioddef_, _cydymdeimlo_

Sym-pa-thy, _cydoddef_, _cydymdeimlad_

Syn-the-sis, _cydosodiad_

Ta-ble-cloth, _bwrddliain_, _lliain bwrdd_

Tale-bear-er, _clepgi_, _chwedlwr_

Talk-a-tive, _chwedleuog_, _dywedgar_

Tan-gi-ble, _cyfhwrddadwy_, _teimladwy_

Tap-es-try, _teisban_; _crogleni_

Tar-paul-ing, _pyglen_; _llongwr_

Tax-a-tion, _trethiad_, _ardrethiad_

Teach-a-ble, _addysgadwy_, _hyddysg_

Tech-ni-cal, _celfyddydawl_, _celfyddus_

Te-di-ous, _hirfaith_, _dygn_; _poenus_

Tel-e-graph, _pellgraff_

Tel-e-scope, _pellddrych_, _ysbienddrych_

Tem-per-ance, _cymmedroldeb_

Tem-per-ate, _cymmedrol_; _sobr_

Tem-po-ral, _amserol_, _tymhorol_; _bydol_, _lleygol_

Temp-ta-tion, _hudiad_; _profedigaeth_

Te-na-cious, _gludiog_; _gwydn_

Ten-der-ness, _tynerwch_, _meddalwch_

Ten-e-ment, _ardrethdy_, _tyddyn_

Term-in-ate, _terfynu_, _gorphen_

Ter-ri-ble, _dychrynllyd_, _arswydus_, _ofnadwy_, _erchyll_

Ter-rif-ic, _dychrynllyd_, _arswydus_

Ter-ri-fy, _brawychu_, _dychrynu_

Tes-ta-ceous, _cregynog_, _cregynaidd_

Test-a-ment, _cymynaeth_, _ewyllys ddiweddaf_

Tes-ta-tor, _cymynai_, _cymynwr_

Tes-ta-trix, _cymynes_, _cymynwraig_

Tes-ti-fy, _tystiolaethu_: _tystio_; _profi_

Thank-ful-ness, _diolchgarwch_

Thanks-giv-ing, _diolchdaliad_

The-a-tre, _chwareudy_; _cemmaes_

Thence-for-ward, _ym mlaen o'r amser hwnw_

The-or-em, _rheol brofadwy_, _gwiredigaeth_

The-o-ry, _golygddysg_, _golygiaeth_

There-a-bout, _o ddeutu yno_, _yn agos_

There-af-ter, _gwedi hyny_, _ar ol hyny_

Thiev-ish-ness, _lladradgarwch_

Thor-ough-fare, _trwyddedfa_

Thought-ful-ness, _meddylgarwch_

Thrash-ing-floor, _llawr dyrnu_

Threat-en-ing, _bygythiad_, _bygyliad_

Thun-der-bolt, _taranfollt_, _mellten_

Thun-der-ing, _taranllyd_; _bygythiol_

Tim-or-ous, _ofnus_, _aneon_

Ti-tle-page, _dalen enwol_, _gwyneb ddalen_

To-geth-er, _ynghyd_, _ar unwaith_

Tol-er-ate, _goddef_, _caniatau_, _gadu_

Tor-ment-or, _poenydiwr_, _poenwr_

Tor-na-do, _corwynt_, _trowynt_

Tor-tu-ous, _torchog_, _dolenog_; _niweidiol_

To-tal-ly, _yn gwbl_, _yn llwyr_

Tour-na-ment, _ffugymgyrch_, _ffugymladd_

Tract-a-ble, _hydrin_, _trinadwy_

Tra-di-tion, _traddodiad_, _hengof_

Trag-e-dy, _dïenchware_; _erchylldro_

Trans-ac-tion, _gorchwyl_, _neges_

Trans-fig-ure, _gweddnewid_

Trans-gres-sion, _troseddiad_, _camwedd_, _anwiredd_

Trans-gres-sor, _troseddwr_

Tran-si-tion, _trofiad_, _trawssymmudiad_

Tran-si-tive, _trofus_, _trawsfynedigol_

Trans-la-tion, _cyfieithiad_, _trosiad_

Trans-la-tor, _cyfieithydd_

Trans-mis-sion, _trosglwyddiad_

Trans-mit-tal, _trosglwydd_

Trans-pa-rent, _tryloyw_, _gloyw_

Trans-verse-ly, _ar groes_, _yn groes ymgroes_

Trav-el-ler, _teithiwr_, _ymdeithydd_

Treach-er-ous, _bradus_, _bradwrus_

Treach-er-y, _brad_, _bradwriaeth_; _twyll_

Treas-u-rer, _trysorydd_, _trysorwr_

Tre-men-dous, _dychrynllyd_, _ofnadwy_

Tri-an-gle, _triongl_, _tryfal_

Tri-bu-nal, _brawdle_, _gorsedd barn_

Trin-i-ty, _trindawd_, _trindod_

Triv-i-al, _gwael_, _dibwys_, _bychanig_

Tri-um-phant, _gorfoleddus_

Trop-i-cal, _trofanawl_

Trou-ble-some, _blin_, _blinderus_, _terfysyus_

Trum-pet-er, _udganwr_, _udgenydd_

Tu-bu-lar, _chwibolog_, _pibgeuol_

Tu-i-tion, _amddiffyniad_, _addysgaeth_

Tur-bu-lence, _annhrefn_, _cyffro_, _terfysg_

Tur-bu-lent, _terfysglyd_, _tonawg_

Typ-i-cal, _cysgodawl_, _arwyddol_

Tyr-an-nize, _gorthrymu_, _gormesu_

Tyr-an-ny, _gormeslywodraeth_, _gormes_

Ul-cer-ate, _llynori_, _gwelïo_

Ul-cer-ous, _llynorog_, _gwelïawg_

Ul-ti-mate, _diweddaf_; _eithaf_

Un-a-ble, _analluog_, _egwan_

Un-a-ware, _yn ddiarwybod_, _yn ddisymwth_

Un-be-lief, _anghred_, _anghrediniaeth_

Un-cer-tain, _ansicr_, _annilys_

Un-civ-il, _anfoesgar_, _anfwyn_

Un-clean-ness, _aflendid_, _brynti_

Un-com-mon, _anghyffredin_, _anaml_

Un-con-cern, _diofalwch_, _diystyrwch_

Un-cov-er, _datdoi_, _dynoethi_, _didoi_

Un-daunt-ed, _diofn_, _eofn_, _hyf_

Un-de-filed, _dihalog_; _dilwgr_

Un-der-hand, _dirgel_, _lladradaidd_

Un-der-line, _tanlinellu_, _islinellu_

Un-der-mine, _tangloddio_; _disodli_

Un-der-neath, _dan_, _tan_, _tanodd_

Un-der-stand, _deall_, _dirnad_, _amgyffred_

Un-der-stood, _dealledig_

Un-der-take, _ymgymeryd_, _ymosod ar_

Un-doubt-ed, _diamheuol_, _dios_

Un-du-late, _tonogi_

Un-ea-sy, _anesmwyth_, _cyffrous_

Un-e-qual, _anghyfartal_, _anwastad_

Un-e-ven, _anwastad_, _anghyfartal_

Un-ex-pert, _anfedrus_, _anhwylus_

Un-fad-ing, _anniflanol_, _anwywol_

Un-faith-ful, _anffyddlon_, _twyllodrus_

Un-feel-ing, _annheimladol_, _dideimlad_

Un-for-seen, _heb ei ragweled_

Un-friend-ly, _anghyfeillgar_

Un-fruit-ful, _anffrwythlawn_, _diffrwyth_

Un-god-ly, _annuwiol_, _didduw_

Un-grace-ful, _anheledliw_, _anhardd_

Un-grate-ful, _anniolchgar_, _diddiolch_

Un-ground-ed, _disail_, _disylfaen_

Un-hap-py, _annedwydd_, _anwynfydedig_

Un-health-y, _afiach_

Un-ho-ly, _ansantaidd_, _aflan_

U-ni-form, _unffurf_, _unwedd_, _unddull_

U-ni-ty, _cyfundeb_, _undeb_, _under_

U-ni-verse, _byd_, _bydysawd_

Un-kind-ness, _anfwynder_, _anrhadlonedd_

Un-law-ful, _anghyfreithlawn_

Un-like-ly, _annhebygol_, _annhebyg_

Un-luck-y, _anffodus_, _anhapus_

Un-mind-ful, _anystyriol_, _difeddwl_, _diofal_

Un-pleas-ant, _anhyfryd_, _annhirion_

Un-read-y, _anmharod_; _anhwylus_

Un-right-eous, _anghyfiawn_, _anuniawn_

Un-ru-ly, _afreolus_, _penwyllt_, _dirëol_

Un-set-tle, _ansefydlu_

Un-sta-ble, _anwadal_

Un-stead-fast, _anniysgog_, _anniymod_

Un-stead-y, _gwamal_, _anwadal_

Un-thank-ful, _diddiolch_, _anniolchgar_

Un-ti-dy, _digryno_, _annhaclus_

Un-time-ly, _annhymig_, _anamserol_

Un-whole-some, _afiachus_, _aniach_

Un-wil-ling, _anewyllysgar_, _anfoddog_

Un-wor-thy, _annheilwng_, _anwiw_

Up-per-most, _uchaf_, _uchelaf_

Up-right-ness, _uniondeb_, _gonestrwydd_

Ur-gen-cy, _anghenrhaid_, _dirni_

Use-ful-ness, _defnyddioldeb_

U-su-al, _arferol_, _cyffredin_

U-surp-er, _traisfeddianwr_, _gormeswr_

Us-u-ry, _ocr_, _arlog_

U-ten-sil, _dodrefnyn_, _llestryn_

Ut-ter-ance, _llafarawd_, _llafariad_, _ymadrodd_; _eithaf_

Ut-ter-ing, _traethiad_; _lled-daeniad_

Ut-ter-ly, _yn hollol_, _yn llwyr_, _yn gwbl_

Ut-ter-most, _eithaf_, _pellaf_, _eithafig_

Va-ca-tion, _dyspaid_, _hamdden_, _seibiant_, _gwaghâd_

Vac-u-um, _gwag_, _gwagder_

Vag-a-bond, _crwydraidd_, _bedlemaidd_

Va-gran-cy, _crwydreiaeth_, _gwibrodiad_

Vain-glo-ry, _gwagogoniant_

Van-i-ty, _gwagedd_, _gwegi_, _oferedd_

Va-por-ous, _mygdarthog_, _agerol_

Va-ri-ance, _amrywiad_; _amrafael_, _anghytundeb_

Va-ri-ous, _amrywiol_; _aml_

Va-ry-ing, _neilliad_, _gwahaniaethiad_

Vas-sal-age, _gwarogaeth_, _caethwasanaeth_

Veg-e-tate, _hydyfu_, _tyfu_

Ve-he-mence, _angerdd_, _taerni_

Ve-he-ment, _angerddol_, _tanbaid_; _awchus_, _llym_

Ve-hi-cle, _cludai_, _cludiedydd_, _clud_

Ven-om-ous, _gwenwynig_, _gwenwynllyd_

Ven-i-son, _hyddgig_, _cig danas_

Ven-ti-late, _gwyntyllio_

Ven-ture-some, _anturiol_

Ver-bal-ly, _mewm geiriau_, _ar air_

Ver-bat-im, _gair yn ngair_, _yn llythyrenol_

Ver-ber-ate, _curo_, _taro_, _ceryddu_

Ver-i-fy, _gwirio_, _gorchwirio_

Ver-i-ly, _yn wir_, _yn ddiau_

Ver-si-fy, _mydru_, _prydyddu_

Vert-i-cal, _nenawl_, _uchbenol_

Vet-er-an, _hen filwr_, _caledfilwr_; _hen_, _oedranus_, _profedig_

Vex-a-tion, _gofid_, _blinder_, _curiad_

Vi-bra-tion, _ymsiglad_, _ysgydwad_

Vic-ar-age, _uchberigloriaeth_

Vice-ge-rent, _rhaglaw_, _huail_

Vic-to-ry, _buddugoliaeth_, _goruchafiaeth_

Vig-i-lance, _gwyliadwriaeth_, _gofal_; _pryder_

Vig-i-lant, _gwyliadwrus_, _gofalus_

Vig-or-ous, _egniol_, _bywiog_

Vil-lain-ous, _ysgeler_, _atgas_, _drygus_

Vin-ci-ble, _gorchfygadwy_, _gorfodadwy_

Vin-di-cate, _diffyn_; _cyfiawnhau_

Vin-e-gar, _gwinegr_, _surlyn_

Vi-o-late, _halogi_, _treisio_, _troseddu_

Vi-o-lence, _trais_, _traha_, _gormes_, _gorthrech_

Vi-o-lent, _tanbaid_, _ffyrnig_

Vir-tu-al, _effeithiol_; _gweithredol_

Vir-tu-ous, _rhinweddol_, _effeithiol_; _da_

Vir-u-lence, _gwenwyn_, _adwyth_

Vir-u-lent, _gwenwynig_, _adwythig_

Vis-i-ble, _gweledigaeth_; _gweled_

Vis-it-or, _ymwelydd_, _gofwywr_

Viv-i-fy, _bywio_, _bywiogi_, _bywhau_

Vo-ca-tion, _galw_, _galwad_, _galwedigaeth_

Vol-a-tile, _ffwg_, _a hedo_; _hedin_, _hedegol_

Vol-ca-no, _llosgfal_, _llosgfynydd_

Vol-u-ble, _hydro_, _rhugl_, _hyawdl_, _ffraeth_

Vol-un-teer, _gwirfoddiad_

Vo-mit-ing, _cyfogiad_

Vo-ta-ry, _addunwr_, _ymddiofrydwr_; _diofrydol_, _addunedol_

Voy-ag-er, _mordeithiwr_, _mordwywr_

Vul-gar-ly, _yn gyffredin_, _yn ddifoes_

Walk-ing-stick, _ffon_, _llawffon_

Wal-low-ing, _ymdreiglad_, _ymdryboliad_

Wan-der-er, _crwydryn_, _gwibiad_

Wan-der-ing, _crwydriad_, _disperawd_

Wan-ton-ness, _anlladrwydd_, _nwyfiant_

Watch-ful-ness, _gwyliadwrusrwydd_

Wa-ter-course, _dyfrlle_, _dyfrffos_

Wa-ter-fowl, _dwfraderyn_

Wa-ter-mark, _llifnod_

Wav-er-ing, _anwadal_, _ansefydlog_

Way-far-ing, _teithiol_, _fforddol_

Wea-ri-some, _lluddedawl_, _blinderus_

Weath-er-cock, _ceiliog gwynt_, _awelfynag_

Web-foot-ed, _cyfandroed_

Wed-nes-day, _dydd Mercher_

Weed-ing-hook, _chwynogl_

Wel-com-ing, _croesawiad_

Well-wish-er, _ewyllysiwr da_

West-er-ly, _gorllewinol_

What-ev-er, _pa bynag_, _beth bynag_

Wheel-bar-row, _berfa olwynog_, _berfa_

Where-in-to, _i'r hyn_, _i'r hwn_

Where-ev-er, _yn mha le bynag_

Whim-si-cal, _ysmala_, _hyntiog_

Whis-per-ing, _syganiad_, _sisiad_

Whit-sun-day, _Sulgwyn_

Who-ev-er, _pwy bynag_

Wick-ed-ness, _drygioni_, _anfadrwydd_

Wid-ow-hood, _gweddwdod_

Wil-der-ness, _anialwch_, _diffeithwch_

Wil-ful-ly, _o wirfodd_; _yn ystyfnig_

Wil-ling-ness, _ewyllysgarwch_

Wine-bib-ber, _gwinlyngcwr_, _gwinyfwr_

Wonderful, _rhyfeddol_, _aruthrol_

Work-man-ship, _gweithiant_, _celfyddyd_

Wor-ship-er, _addolwr_, _addolydd_

Wor-ship-ful, _parchedig_, _anrhydeddus_

Wor-thi-ly, _yn deilwng_, _yn addas_

Wretch-ed-ness, _trueni_, _gresyndawd_

Writ-ing-desk, _ysgrifenfwrdd_

Wrong-ful-ly, _yn gamweddus_, _yn feius_

Yel-low-ish, _melynaidd_, _lledfelyn_

Yel-low-ness, _melynder_, _melyni_

Yeo-man-ry, _gwrengiaid_

Yes-ter-day, _doe_

Yes-ter-night, _neithiwr_

Youth-ful-ness, _ieuengctid_




WORDS OF FOUR SYLLABLES.



Ab-bre-vi-ate, _talfyru_, _byrhau_, _cwtogi_

Ab-di-ca-tion, _llysiant_; _ymwrthodiad_

A-bil-i-ty, _gallu_; _medr_, _dawn_, _cymhwysder_, _nerth_

A-bom-in-ate, _casäu_, _ffieiddio_

Ab-so-lute-ly, _yn gwbl_, _yn hollol_; _yn arbenig_

Ab-ste-mi-ous, _sobr_, _cymmedrol_

Ab-sur-di-ty, _afresymoldeb_; _ynfydrwydd_

A-bu-sive-ly, _yn enllibaidd_, _yn oganllyd_; _yn sarhäus_

A-cad-e-my, _prifysgol_, _athrofa_

Ac-cel-er-ate, _prysuro_, _ebrwyddo_

Ac-cep-ta-ble, _derbyniol_, _cymmeradwy_, _boddlawn_

Ac-cep-ta-bly, _yn dderbyniol_, _yn gymmeradwy_

Ac-ces-sa-ry, _cefnogwr_; _cyfranogwr_; _cynnorthwyol_

Ac-ces-si-ble, _dyfodadwy_; _hygyrch_; _mwynaidd_

Ac-ces-so-ry, _cymmodawl_; _cyfranogol_

Ac-ci-dent-al, _damweiniol_, _dygwyddol_

Ac-cliv-i-ty, _esgyniad_, _gallt_, _bronallt_

Ac-com-mo-date, _addasu_; _diwallu_; _cymhwyso_

Ac-com-pa-ny, _cydymdeithio_; _hebrwng_

Ac-com-plish-ment, _cwblhâd_, _addurn_; _cyflawniad_

Ac-cord-ing-ly, _yn gyfatebol_, _yn ganlynol_; _felly_

Ac-count-a-ble, _cyfrifol_, _atebol_

Ac-cu-mu-late, _casglu_, _pentyru_, _tyru_

Ac-cu-ra-cy, _cywreindeb_; _gofal_, _cywirdeb_

Ac-cu-sa-tion, _cyhuddiad_, _cwyn_

Ac-cu-sa-tive, _cyhuddol_

Ac-know-ledg-ment, _cydnabyddiaeth_; _addefiad_

Ac-qui-es-cence, _ymfoddloniad_; _cydsyniad_; _goddefiad_

Ac-qui-si-tion, _caffaeliad_, _cyrhaeddiad_

Ac-tu-al-ly, _yn weithredol_; _mewn effaith_; _yn wir_

Ad-ap-ta-tion, _cyfaddasiad_; _cymhwysder_

Ad-min-is-ter, _gwasanaethu_, _gweinyddu_; _dirprwyo_

Ad-mi-ral-ty, _morlys_, _llyngeslys_

Ad-mi-ra-tion, _rhyfeddiad_, _syndod_; _hoffedd_

Ad-mi-ra-ble, _rhyfeddol_; _da_; _rhagorol_

Ad-mo-ni-tion, _rhybudd_, _cynghor_; _annogaeth_

Ad-o-ra-tion, _addoliad_: _parch_, _anrhydedd_

Ad-van-ta-geous, _buddiol_, _llesol_; _manteisol_

Ad-ver-sa-ry, _gwrthwynebwr_, _gelyn_

Ad-ver-si-ty, _adfyd_, _trallod_, _drygfyd_; _ing_

Ad-ver-tise-ment, _hysbysiad_, _cyhoeddiad_

Ad-vis-a-ble, _cymhwys_, _addas_; _cynghoradwy_

A-dul-ter-ate, _llygru_; _cymmysgu_

A-dul-ter-y, _godineb_, _puteindra_

Af-fec-tion-ate, _serchog_, _caruaidd_

Af-fi-da-vit, _tystlw_, _llw_

Af-fin-i-ty, _cyfathrach_; _tebygoliaeth_

Af-firm-a-tion, _cadarnhâd_, _honiad_

Af-firm-a-tive, _cadarnhaol_, _honiadol_

Ag-i-ta-tion, _cynhyrfiad_, _cyffroad_

Ag-gra-vat-ing, _mwyhaol_, _trymhaol_

Ag-gra-va-tion, _mwyhâd_, _chwanegiad_

A-gree-a-ble, _unol_, _cyfatebol_: _boddus_

Ag-ri-cul-ture, _amaethyddiaeth_, _arddwriaeth_

A-lac-ri-ty, _llawenydd_, _bywiogrwydd_; _parodrwydd_

Al-ien-a-tion, _estroniad_; _trosiad_

Al-le-ga-tion, _honiad_, _gwiriad_, _haeriad_; _dadl_

Al-le-go-ry, _alleg_, _aralleg_, _cyffelybiaeth_

Al-le-vi-ate, _ysgafnhau_, _esmwytho_

Al-low-a-ble, _goddefol_, _caniataol_

Al-ter-a-tion, _cyfnewidiad_, _newidiol_

Al-ter-ca-tion, _ymgecriad_, _ymrafael_

Al-ter-nate-ly, _argylch_, _yn gylchynol_

Al-to-ge-ther, _yn hollol_, _i gyd_, _yn llwyr_

Am-bas-sa-dor, _cenadwr_, _negeswr_

Am-big-u-ous, _amwys_, _amhëus_

A-mel-ior-ate, _diwyllio_, _gwelläu_

A-mi-a-ble, _hawddgar_, _prydweddol_

Am-i-ca-ble, _cyfeillgar_, _cariadus_

Am-mu-ni-tion, _arlwy rhyfel_; _cadarlwy_

Am-phib-i-ous, _deuelfenol_; _cyntefin_

Am-pu-ta-tion, _amdoriad_, _toriad aelod_

A-nal-o-gy, _cydweddiad_, _cyffelybiad_

A-nal-y-sis, _dosraniad_, _dadglymiad_

A-nat-o-my, _difyniaeth_; _attoriaeth_

An-i-mad-vert, _adfrydu_; _barnu_; _ceryddu_

An-i-ma-tion, _bywhad_, _bywiogrwydd_

An-ni-hi-late, _diddymu_, _dyfetha_

An-nu-al-ly, _yn flynyddol_

An-nu-i-ty, _blwyddoseb_, _blwydd-dál_

A-non-y-mous, _anhysbys_, _dienw_

An-swer-a-ble, _atebol_; _cyfrifol_

An-tag-o-nist, _gwrthwynebwr_; _gwrthblaid_

An-te-ce-dence, _rhagflaeniad_, _blaenafiaeth_

An-te-ce-dent, _rhagflaenor_, _blaenor_

An-tic-i-pate, _rhagflaenu_; _rhagweled_

An-tip-a-thy, _gwrthnaws_, _casineb_

An-tip-o-des, _gwrthdroediaid_, _gwrthdraedolion_

An-ti-qui-ty, _hynafiaeth_, _yr amser gynt_

An-tith-e-sis, _cyferbyniaeth_, _gwrthosodiad_

Anx-i-e-ty, _trymfryd_, _pryder gofal_

A-pe-ri-ent, _agorai_; _rhyddhaol_

A-pol-o-gy, _amddiffyniad_; _esgusawd_

Ap-o-plex-y, _menyddwst_, _y parlys mud_

A-pos-tro-phe, _tolnod_: _gwrthdro_; _dadymchwel_

Ap-pa-ra-tus, _offer_, _arfau_; _arlwy_

Ap-pa-rent-ly, _yn amlwg_; _mewn ymddangosiad_

Ap-pel-la-tion, _enwad_; _galwad_; _enw_

Ap-pli-ca-tion, _cymhwysiad_, _cais_; _ymroad_

Ap-po-si-tion, _atosodiad_, _arddodiad_

Ap-pre-ci-ate, _prisio_, _mawrhau_, _gwerthfawrogi_

Ap-pre-hen-sion, _amgyffred_, _deall_; _ofn_

Ap-pro-ba-tion, _cymmeradwyaeth_

Ap-pro-pri-ate, _neillduol_, _priodol_: _priodoli_

Ap-prox-i-mate, _nesu_, _dynesu_, _cyfagosi_

Ap-pur-ten-ance, _perthynoliad_; _perthynas_

Ar-bi-tra-tor, _dyddiwr_, _canolwr_; _cymmrodeddwr_

Ar-bit-ra-ry, _trawsarglwyddol_; _gormesol_

Ar-chi-tec-ture, _adeilyddiaeth_, _pensaernïaeth_

A-rith-me-tic, _rhifyddiaeth_, _rhifyddeg_

Ar-tic-u-late, _llefarol_: _llefaru_

Ar-ti-fi-cial, _celfydd_; _dynwaredol_

Ar-til-ler-y, _cadoffer_; _magnelau_

As-cen-den-cy, _goruchafiaeth_; _awdurdod_

As-pi-ra-tion, _awydd_, _gorawydd_; _ymgais_

As-sas-si-nate, _cuddlofruddio_

As-sid-u-ous, _dyfal_, _diwyd_

As-so-ci-ate, _cydymaith_: _cymdeithasu_

As-ton-ish-ment, _braw_, _synedigaeth_; _syndod_

As-trol-o-gy, _serddewiniaeth_

As-tron-o-my, _seryddiaeth_, _seroneg_

At-tain-a-ble, _cyrhaeddadwy_; _caffaeladwy_

At-ten-tive-ly, _yn ddyfal_, _yn ofalus_

Aug-men-ta-tion, _cynnyddiad_, _mwyhâd_

Au-thor-i-ty, _awdurdod_, _gallu_

Au-tom-a-ton, _hunanysgogydd_

Aux-il-ia-ry, _cynnorthwywr_; _cynnorthwyol_

Av-a-ri-cious, _cybyddlyd_; _crintach_

A-void-a-ble, _gocheladwy_

Bar-bar-i-ty, _babariaeth_; _creulondeb_

Ba-rom-e-ter, _hinfynag_; _awyrfynag_

Bel-lig-er-ent, _rhyfelblaid_; _rhyfelgar_

Ben-e-dic-tion, _bendith_; _bendithiad_

Ben-e-fac-tor, _cymmwynaswr_, _noddwr_

Be-nef-i-cent, _daionus_, _cymmwynasol_

Be-nev-o-lence, _caredigrwydd_; _ewyllys da_; _hoffedd_, _serch_; _elusen_

Be-nev-o-lent, _caredig_; _elusengar_

Be-nig-ni-ty, _tiriondeb_; _haelioni_

Bi-en-ni-al, _dwyflwyddol_, _dwyflwydd_

Bi-og-ra-phy, _bywgraffiad_, _cofiant_

Bi-tu-mi-nous, _duglistaidd_, _llosglysaidd_

Ca-lam-i-ty, _blinfyd_, _drygfyd_; _anffawd_

Cal-cu-la-tion, _cyfrif_; _bwriad_; _barn_

Ca-pac-i-ty, _gallu_; _cymhwysder_; _cyflwr_; _swydd_; _deall_

Cap-i-ta-tion, _peniant_; _treth y penau_

Cap-tiv-i-ty, _caethiwed_; _caethglud_; _alldudiaeth_

Car-nal-i-ty, _cnawdolrwydd_; _trythyllwch_

Car-niv-o-rous, _cigysol_, _cigreibus_

Ca-tas-tro-phe, _gwrthdro_; _anffawd_

Cat-er-pil-lar, _llindys_, _pryf y dail_

Cel-e-bra-tion, _dathliad_; _cyfargofiad_; _clodforiad_

Ce-leb-ri-ty, _enwogrwydd_; _clod_, _bri_

Ce-ler-i-ty, _buander_, _cyflymdra_

Cem-e-ter-y, _claddfa_, _monwent_, _beddrawd_

Cen-so-ri-ous, _hyfeiol_, _enllibus_; _senol_

Cen-trif-u-gal, _canolffo_, _creiddffoawl_

Cen-trip-e-tal, _canolgyrch_, _creiddgyrch_

Cer-e-mo-ny, _defod_, _arfer_, _seremoni_

Cer-tif-i-cate, _tystysgrif_, _tysteb_: _ysgrifdystio_, _tystebu_

Char-ac-ter-ize, _nodweddu_, _arwyddnodi_

Char-i-ta-ble, _hael_, _elusengar_

Chris-tian-i-ty, _cristionogaeth_

Chro-nol-o-gy, _amseryddiaeth_, _amsereg_

Chro-nom-e-ter, _awriadur_; _amseriadur_

Cir-cu-la-tion, _cylchrediad_, _cylchdroad_; _rhediad_; _taeniad_

Cir-cum-cis-ion, _enwaediad_; _blaendoriad_

Cir-cum-fer-ence, _amgylchedd_, _cwmpas_

Co-ag-u-late, _ceulo_, _cawsio_; _ymdewychu_

Co-ef-fi-cient, _cydweithredol_; _cydachosol_

Co-in-ci-dence, _cyttrawiad_, _cytundeb_

Co-in-ci-dent, _cyd-ddygwyddol_, _cytunol_

Col-lat-er-al, _cyfystlysog_, _cyfochrog_; _cyfochrol_, _cyfystlys_

Col-lo-qui-al, _ymddyddanol_, _cydlafarol_

Com-bi-na-tion, _cyfuniad_, _cydsyniad_; _cyssylltiad_, _cydiad_

Com-bus-ti-ble, _dysgymmon_; _hylosg_

Com-fort-a-ble, _cysurus_, _dyddanol_

Com-mem-o-rate, _cyfargofio_, _coffäu_

Com-mend-a-ble, _canmoladwy_, _clodforus_

Com-mend-a-tion, _canmoliaeth_, _cymmeradwyaeth_

Com-ment-a-ry, _esboniad_, _amlygiad_: _esbonio_, _egluro_

Com-mis-er-ate, _tosturio_, _trugarhau_

Com-mis-sion-er, _dirprwywr_, _cynnyrchiolydd_

Com-mo-di-ous, _cyflëus_, _cymhwys_

Com-mod-i-ty, _nwydd_; _eiddo_; _mantais_

Com-mu-ni-cate, _cyfranu_, _cyfranogi_; _mynegi_; _cydio_

Com-mu-ni-ty, _gwladwriaeth_; _y wlad_

Com-mu-ta-tion, _newidiad_, _cyfnewid_; _pridwerth_

Com-par-a-tive, _cymharol_, _cymhariaethol_

Com-pat-i-ble, _cydweddol_, _cysson_

Com-pen-di-um, _crynodeb_, _talfyriad_

Com-pen-sa-tion, _taledigaeth_; _tâl_; _boddloniad_

Com-pe-ti-tion, _cydgais_, _cystadleuaeth_

Com-po-si-tion, _cyfansoddiad_; _rhandaliad_

Con-cav-i-ty, _argeuedd_, _ceuedd_, _ceudod_

Con-cil-i-ate, _cymmodi_, _heddychu_

Con-cep-ti-ble, _dealladwy_

Con-dem-na-tion, _collfarn_; _condemniad_

Con-den-sa-tion, _dwysiad_, _tewhâd_

Con-di-tion-al, _terfyniad_, _ammodiad_; _ammodol_

Con-de-scen-sion, _ymddarostyngiad_

Con-fed-er-ate, _cynghreiriwr_: _cynghreirio_

Con-firm-a-tion, _cadarnhad_, _cryfhâd_

Con-form-i-ty, _cydffurfiad_; _cyssondeb_

Con-ge-la-tion, _cyttewychiad_; _rhewiad_

Con-ge-ni-al, _cydrywiol_; _naturiol_

Con-grat-u-late, _cydlawenhau â_, _cydlawenychu_

Con-gre-ga-tion, _cynnulleidfa_

Con-sci-en-tious, _cydwybodol_

Con-se-quent-ly, _yn ganlyniadol_; _gan hyny_

Con-serv-a-tive, _ceidwadwr_, _diogelwr_; _ceidwadol_, _amddiffynol_

Con-sid-er-ate, _ystyriol_, _pwyllog_

Con-sist-o-ry, _llys yr esgob_, _eglwyslys_

Con-so-la-tion, _cysur_, _dyddanwch_

Con-spic-u-ous, _amlwg_, _eglur_; _enwog_

Con-spi-ra-cy, _cydfradwriaeth_, _brad_

Con-stel-la-tion, _cydser_; _cydseryddiad_

Con-sti-pa-tion, _tynhâd_; _bolrwymedd_

Con-sti-tu-ent, _cyfansoddydd_; _aelod hanfodol_; _cyfansoddol_; _elfenol_

Con-sti-tu-tion, _cyfansoddiad_; _gosodiad_; _gosodiaeth_; _cyfraith_

Con-sult-a-tion, _ymgynghoriad_; _ystyriaeth_

Con-tam-i-nate, _halogi_, _llygru_

Con-tem-pla-tion, _myfyrdod_, _astudiaeth_

Con-tig-u-ous, _cyfagos_, _agos_, _cydiol_

Con-tin-u-al, _parhäus_, _gwastadol_

Con-tin-u-ance, _parhâd_, _para_; _arosiad_

Con-tra-dic-tion, _gwrthddywediad_, _gwrthddadl_; _anghysondeb_

Con-tro-ver-sy, _dadl_, _dadleuaeth_; _amrafael_

Con-va-les-cent, _gwelledig_; _ar wellâd_

Con-ve-ni-ence, _cyfleusdra_; _cymhwysder_

Con-ve-ni-ent, _cyfleus_, _addas_; _gweddaidd_

Con-ver-sa-tion, _ymddyddan_, _cydymddyddan_; _buchedd_; _cynnefindod_

Con-vo-ca-tion, _cymmanfa_, _eisteddfod_

Co-op-er-ate, _cydweithio_, _cydweithredu_

Co-or-di-nate, _cydradd_; _cyfochr_

Cop-u-la-tive, _cydiadol_, _cyssylltiadol_

Cor-ol-la-ry, _casgliad_; _canlyniad_

Cor-o-na-tion, _coroniad_; _taleithiad_

Cor-po-ra-tion, _corfforaeth_; _bwrdeisdref_

Cor-re-spond-ence, _cyfateliad_; _gohebiaeth_

Cor-re-spond-ent, _gohebydd_; _cyfatebwr_

Cor-rob-o-rate, _cyfnerthu_; _sicrhau_

Cor-rupt-i-ble, _llygradwy_

Cred-it-a-ble, _cyfrifol_; _parchus clodfawr_

Cru-ci-fix-ion, _croeshoeliad_

Cu-li-na-ry, _ceginaidd_, _ceginol_

Dan-ger-ous-ly, _yn beryglus_, _yn enbyd_

De-cid-ed-ly, _yn benderfynol_, _yn sicr_

De-bil-i-ty, _gwendid_, _llesgedd_

Dec-la-ra-tion, _mynegiad_, _cyhoeddiad_

Dec-li-na-tion, _gogwyddiad_; _disgyniad_

Dec-o-ra-tion, _addurniad_, _harddiad_

Ded-i-ca-tion, _cyflwyniad_, _cyssegriad_

De-fal-ca-tion, _ysgythiad_; _lleihâd_

Def-am-a-tion, _difenwad_, _enllib_

De-fi-cien-cy, _diffyg_; _pall_, _gwallgofiant_

Def-i-ni-tion, _dosbeniad_, _darluniad_

De-form-i-ty, _anffurfiad_; _hyllrwydd_

De-gen-er-ate, _dirywio_, _gwaethygu_

Deg-ra-da-tion, _diraddiad_; _dirywiad_

De-lib-er-ate, _pwyllog_, _ystyriol_: _ystyried_, _pwyllo_

Del-i-ca-cy, _tegwch_; _manyldeb_

De-lin-e-ate, _darlunio_; _dyfalu_

De-lir-i-ous, _penysgafn_, _gorphwyllog_

De-lir-i-um, _ymleferydd_, _penysgafnder_

De-liv-er-ance, _gwaredigaeth_, _gollyngdod_

De-liv-e-ry, _gwarediad_; _trosglwyddiad_

De-moc-ra-cy, _gweriniaeth_, _gwerinlywodraeth_

Dem-on-stra-tion, _arddangosiad_, _profiad_, _eglurhâd_

De-mor-al-ize, _anfoesoli_; _llygru_

De-nom-i-nate, _enwi_, _cyfenwi_

De-plor-a-ble, _gresynol_, _galarus_

Dep-o-si-tion, _adneuaeth_; _diswyddiad_

Dep-re-da-tion, _anrhaethiad_, _ysbeiliad_

Dep-ri-va-tion, _difuddiad_, _amddifadiad_

Dep-u-ta-tion, _cenadwri_, _cenadaeth_; _dirprwywr_; _dirprwy_

Der-i-va-tion, _tarddiad_, _haniad_; _troad_

De-riv-a-tive, _tarddair_; _hanedig_, _tarddedig_

Des-ig-na-tion, _dynodiad_, _amlygiad_; _arfaeth_; _trefniad_

De-sign-ed-ly, _yn fwriadol_, _yn wirfoddol_

De-sir-a-ble, _dymunadwy_; _dymunol_; _chwennychol_

Des-o-la-tion, _anghyfaneddiad_; _anrhaith_

Des-pi-ca-ble, _dirmygadwy_; _dirmygus_

De-spis-a-ble, _dirmygadwy_

De-spon-den-cy, _gwanobaith_, _digalondid_

Des-ti-na-tion, _bwriad_, _arfaeth_; _perwyl_

Des-ti-tu-tion, _angen_, _eisiau_; _amddifadrwyd_

De-ter-min-ate, _terfynedig_; _penderfynol_

De-test-a-ble, _ffiaidd_, _atgas_, _ysgeler_

Dev-as-ta-tion, _difrod_, _anrheithiad_

De-vi-a-tion, _gwyriad_, _cyfeiliorn_

Dex-ter-i-ty, _deheuder_, _medrusrwydd_

Di-ag-o-nal, _croes_, _traws_; _onglog_

Di-am-e-ter, _tryfesur_, _canolfesur_

Dic-tion-a-ry, _geiriadur_, _geirlyfr_

Dif-fi-cul-ty, _anhawsder_; _anhawdd_

Dim-in-u-tive, _bychanig_; _bychan_

Di-rect-o-ry, _cyfarwyddor_; _cyfarwyddol_

Dis-ad-van-tage, _anfantais_: _colledu_

Dis-a-gree-ment, _anghytundeb_; _gwahaniaeth_

Dis-ap-point-ment, _som_, _somedigaeth_

Dis-con-tent-ment, _anfoddlonrwydd_

Dis-con-tin-ue, _ammharu_; _peidio_

Dis-cov-er-y, _dadguddiad_, _darganfyddiad_

Dis-crim-in-ate, _gwahanredol_: _gwahaniaethu_, _gwahanu_

Dis-fran-chise-ment, _difreiniad_

Dis-hon-est-y, _anonestrwydd_; _twyll_

Dis-in-her-it, _dietifeddu_; _dihawlio_

Dis-loy-al-ty, _anffyddlondeb_; _bradwriaeth_

Dis-or-der-ly, _afreolus_; _yn afreolus_

Dis-pens-a-ble, _hebgoradwy_, _hebgorol_

Dis-pen-sa-tion, _goruchwyliaeth_

Dis-po-si-tion, _trefniad_, _dosbarthiad_; _tuedd_; _ansawdd_

Dis-pro-por-tion, _anghyfartaledd_; _anghyfartalu_

Dis-put-a-ble, _dadleuadwy_; _amhëus_

Dis-sat-is-fy, _anfoddloni_, _anfoddhau_

Dis-si-pa-tion, _gwasgariad_; _gwastraff_

Dis-so-lu-tion, _dattodiad_; _diddymiad_

Dis-til-la-tion, _dystylliad_

Dis-til-ler-y, _dystyllfa_

Dis-tri-bu-tion, _cyfraniad_; _rhanedigaeth_

Di-ver-si-fy, _amrywio_; _gwahanu_

Div-in-a-tion, _dewiniaeth_, _darogan_

Di-vin-i-ty, _dwyfoldeb_; _duwdod_; _duwinyddiaeth_

Di-vis-i-ble, _rhanadwy_, _parthadwy_

Dog-mat-i-cal, _awdurdodaidd_

Dor-mi-to-ry, _hundy_, _ystafell gysgu_

Dox-ol-o-gy, _mawlwers_, _mawlgan_

Dys-en-ter-y, _gwaedlif_, _gwaedglwyf_

E-con-o-my, _cynnildeb_; _trefniant_

Ed-u-ca-tion, _addysg_, _addysgiad_, _dysg_

Ef-fect-u-al, _effeithiol_; _gweithredol_

Ef-fem-i-nate, _gwreigaidd_; _benywaidd_: _gwreigeiddio_, _benyweiddio_

Ef-fer-ves-cence, _brydiad_, _dyferwad_

Ef-fer-ves-cent, _dyfrydol_, _dyferwog_

Ef-fi-ca-cious, _effeithiol_, _grymus_

Ef-front-er-y, _haerllugrwydd_; _hyfdra_

E-lab-o-rate, _cywrain_: _cywreinio_

E-lec-tri-cal, _trydanol_; _gwefrol_

E-lec-tri-fy, _trydanu_; _gwefru_

El-i-gi-ble, _dewisol_, _dymunol_; _teilwng_

El-o-cu-tion, _ffraethoneg_, _hyawdledd_

E-man-ci-pate, _rhydd_: _rhyddhau_

Em-bark-a-tion, _llongiad_; _anturiaeth_

Em-bar-rass-ment, _dyryswch_; _methliad_

Em-bas-sa-dor, _cenadwr_

Em-bez-zle-ment, _darnguddiad_, _celciad_

E-merg-en-cy, _dadymsawdd_; _damwain_; _achlysur_

Em-i-gra-tion, _ymfudiad_; _symmudiad_

E-mol-u-ment, _budd_, _elw_, _mantais_

Em-po-ri-um, _marchnadfa_; _synwyrfa_

Em-u-la-tion, _cyfymgais_, _cystadlaeth_

En-cour-age-ment, _cefnogaeth_, _annogaeth_, _calonogiad_

En-fran-chise-ment, _rhyddfreiniad_; _rhyddhâd_

E-nor-mi-ty, _anfadrwydd_, _ysgelerder_

En-ter-tain-ing, _difyr_, _dyddan_, _boddiol_

En-ter-tain-ment, _croesaw_, _derbyniad_; _gwledd_, _lluniaeth_; _chware_

En-thu-si-asm, _penboethni_, _brwdfrydedd_

E-nu-mer-ate, _rhifo_, _cyfrif_, _rhifnodi_

E-nun-ci-ate, _traethu_, _adrodd_; _cyhoeddi_

Ep-i-dem-ic, _haint ymdaenol_; _ymdaenol_

E-piph-a-ny, _ystwyll_; _yr ymddadgudd_

E-pis-co-pal, _arolygol_, _esgobol_

E-pit-o-me, _crynodeb_, _talfyriad_

E-qual-i-ty, _cyfartaledd_, _gwastadrwydd_

E-ques-tri-an, _marchogol_; _marchol_

E-qui-dis-tance, _cydbellder_, _cysbellder_

E-qui-dis-tant, _cydbell_, _gogysbell_

E-qui-noc-tial, _cyhydeddol_; _cynosol_

E-quiv-a-lence, _cydwerthedd_; _cyfartaledd_: _cyfartalu_; _cystadlu_

E-quiv-a-lent, _cyfwerth_; _cyfystyr_; _cyfartal_, _cystal_

E-quiv-o-cal, _mwysair_; _amwysair_; _amwys_, _deuystyr_

Er-ro-ne-ous, _cyfeiliornus_; _gwallus_

Er-u-di-tion, _dysg_, _dysgeidiaeth_

Es-pe-cial-ly, _yn neillduol_; _yn enwedig_

Es-tab-lish-ment, _sefydliad_; _gosodiad_

Es-ti-ma-tion, _cyfrifiad_, _prisiad_; _parch_, _anrhydedd_

Es-tu-a-ry, _mornant_, _morgaingc_

E-ter-ni-ty, _tragwyddoldeb_

E-vac-u-ate, _gwaghau_; _gadael_

E-van-gel-ist, _efengylwr_

E-vap-o-rate, _tarthu_, _ageru_; _gwasgaru_

E-vent-u-al, _digwyddol_, _damweiniol_

Ev-er-last-ing, _tragwyddoldeb_, _tragwyddol_

Ev-er-y-where, _ym mhob man_, _ym mhob lle_

Ev-i-ta-ble, _gocheladwy_

Ev-o-lu-tion, _dadblygiad_, _treigliaid_

Ex-ag-ger-ate, _mwyhau_, _chwanegu_

Ex-alt-a-tion, _dyrchafiad_, _cyfodiad_

Ex-as-per-ate, _llidio_, _digio_, _cynhyrfu_

Ex-ca-va-tion, _ceuad_, _cafniad_, _cloddiad_

Ex-ceed-ing-ly, _tra_, _dros ben_; _yn rhagorol_; _gormodedd_, _gormod_

Ex-ces-sive-ly, _yn ormodol_; _rhy_, _tra_

Ex-cla-ma-tion, _gwaedd_, _bloedd_, _gorfoledd_

Ex-clu-sive-ly, _yn neillduol_, _o'r neilldu_; _oddi eithr_, _oddigerth_

Ex-cru-ci-ate, _poeni_, _dirboeni_; _poenus_

Ex-cus-a-ble, _esgusadwy_; _esgusodol_

Ex-e-cu-tion, _gwneuthuriad_; _dienyddiad_

Ex-e-cu-tor, _olweinydd_, _cymmynweinydd_, _gweinyddwr_

Ex-em-pla-ry, _dilynwiw_; _engreifftiol_

Ex-em-pli-fy, _engreifftioli_; _arddangos_

Ex-ha-la-tion, _tarthiad_, _agerdd_; _mws_

Ex-hi-bi-tion, _arddangosiad_; _arddangosfa_

Ex-hort-a-tion, _annogaeth_; _cynghoriad_; _rhybudd_

Ex-hu-ma-tion, _dadgladdiad_; _codiad o'r bedd_

Ex-on-er-ate, _dadlwytho_; _rhyddhau_

Ex-or-bi-tant, _dirfawr_, _gormodol_; _afreolus_

Ex-pect-a-tion, _dysgwyliant_; _gobeithiad_

Ex-pe-di-ence, _addasrwydd_; _anturiaeth_

Ex-pe-di-ent, _ffordd_, _modd_, _dyfais_; _cyfaddas_, _cymhwys_

Ex-pe-di-tion, _brys_, _prysurdeb_; _cyflymder_; _rhyfelgyrch_;
_llyngesgyrch_

Ex-pend-i-ture, _traul_, _cost_; _treuliad_, _gwariad_

Ex-pe-ri-ence, _profiad_: _ymarfer_: _profi_; _teimlo_

Ex-per-i-ment, _ymbrawf_, _profiad_: _ymbrofi_, _profi_

Ex-pi-a-tion, _cymmod_, _iawn_; _aberth_

Ex-pi-ra-tion, _allananadliad_; _trangc_; _diwedd_

Ex-pla-na-tion, _eglurhâd_, _esboniad_; _amlygiad_

Ex-port-a-tion, _allforiad_, _trosforiad_

Ex-po-si-tion, _eglurhâd_, _esboniad_; _dynoethiad_

Ex-pos-tu-late, _ymliw_; _ymresymu_

Ex-tem-po-re, _yn ddifyfyr_; _yn y man_

Ex-te-ri-or, _y tu allan_; _allanol_, _allan_

Ex-ter-mi-nate, _diwreiddio_; _llwyr ddinystrio_

Ex-tor-tion-er, _cribddeiliwr_, _gorthrymydd_

Ex-trav-a-gance, _rhysedd_, _gormodedd_; _afradlonrwydd_

Ex-trav-a-gant, _afradlawn_; _gormodol_; _afradus_

Ex-trem-i-ty, _eithaf_, _eithafedd_; _cyfyngder_, _gwasgfa_

Ex-u-ber-ance, _arddigonedd_, _helaethrwydd_

Ex-u-ber-ant, _llawn_, _gorlawn_; _helaethlawn_

Fa-cil-i-ty, _rhwyddineb_, _hwylusdod_

Fas-ci-na-tion, _hudoliaeth_; _swyniad_

Fash-ion-a-ble, _arferol_, _defodol_; _dillynwych_

Fa-vour-a-ble, _tirion_, _rhadlawn_; _manteisiol_

Feb-ru-a-ry, _Chwefror_

Fe-lic-i-ty, _dedwyddwch_, _gwynfyd_, _hapusrwydd_

Fer-ment-a-tion, _ymweithiad_, _lefeiniad_

Fe-roc-i-ty, _ffyrnigrwydd_, _creulondeb_

Fer-til-i-ty, _ffrwythlondeb_, _cnydfawredd_

Fes-tiv-i-ty, _llawenydd_, _gorfoledd_

Fi-del-i-ty, _ffyddlondeb_; _gonestrwydd_

Fig-u-ra-tion, _cysgodol_, _arddangosol_; _arwyddluniol_

Fluc-tu-a-tion, _tonogiad_; _bwhwman_; _cyfnewidiad_

Fo-ment-a-tion, _twymolchiad_; _cyffroad_

For-mal-i-ty, _ffurfioldeb_; _ffurf_, _moesddefod_

For-mi-da-ble, _arswydol_, _ofnadwy_, _erchyll_

For-ni-ca-tion, _puteindra_, _godineb_, _aflendid_

Fra-gil-i-ty, _breuder_, _hydoredd_

Fra-ter-ni-ty, _brawdoliaeth_; _cymdeithas_

Fund-a-ment-al, _cyssail_; _rhan hanfodol_; _sylfaenol_

Fu-tu-ri-ty, _dyfodiant_; _peth dyfodol_

Gen-er-al-ly, _yn gyffredinol_, _yn gyffredin_

Gen-er-a-tion, _cenedliad_; _cenedlaeth_; _oes_

Gen-til-i-ty, _boneddigeiddrwydd_; _uchelradd_

Ge-og-ra-phy, _daiaryddiaeth_, _daiarddarluniad_

Ge-ol-o-gy, _daiareg_, _daiarddysg_

Ge-om-e-try, _mesureg_, _mesuryddiaeth_

Glad-i-a-tor, _cleddyfwr_, _ymladdwr_

Grad-u-al-ly, _yn raddol_, _bob yn ychydig_

Gram-mat-i-cal, _gramadegol_

Gra-niv-o-rous, _grawnysol_, _ysrawn_

Gra-tu-i-tous, _anrhegol_; _rhad_; _gwirfoddol_

Grav-i-ta-tion, _dysgyrchiad_, _dymgyrchiad_

Gre-ga-ri-ous, _deadellog_, _minteiawg_

Hab-i-ta-tion, _trigfan_, _annedd_, _cartref_

Ha-bit-u-al, _arferol_, _defodol_; _ansoddol_

Har-mo-ni-ous, _cynghaneddol_, _cydseiniol_

Hes-i-ta-tion, _petrusder_; _geirdagiad_

Het-er-o-dox, _gwrthdybiol_, _geuol_

Hi-ber-ni-an, _Gwyddel_; _Gwyddelig_

His-tor-i-cal, _hanesiol_, _ystorïol_

Hon-our-a-ble, _anrhydeddus_, _parchus_

Ho-ri-zon-tal, _terfyngylch_; _gwastad_

Hor-ti-cul-ture, _garddwriaeth_

Hos-pi-ta-ble, _llettygar_, _croesawgar_

Hos-til-i-ty, _gelyniaeth_; _rhyfel_; _casineb_

Hu-man-i-ty, _dynoliaeth_, _dyngarwch_

Hu-mid-i-ty, _lleithder_, _gwlybrwydd_

Hu-mil-i-ty, _gostyngeiddrwydd_, _difalchedd_

Hy-dro-stat-ics, _dyfrbwysiant_

Hy-per-bo-le, _gormodiaith_, _gorwireb_

Hy-poc-ri-sy, _rhagrith_, _lledrith_, _ffug_

Hy-poth-e-sis, _amcansail_, _tybiaeth_

I-den-ti-cal, _yr un_, _yr unrhyw_; _gwir_

I-den-ti-fy, _unrhywio_, _hunaniaethu_

I-den-ti-ty, _unrhywiaeth_; _yr un peth_

I-dol-a-try, _eilunaddoliaeth_

Ig-no-min-y, _gwarth_; _gwaradwydd_

Il-leg-i-ble, _annarllenadwy_

Il-lit-er-ate, _diddysg_, _anllythrenog_

Il-lus-tra-tion, _eglurhâd_, _deongliad_

Il-lus-tri-ous, _enwog_, _ardderchog_

Im-mac-u-late, _difrycheulyd_, _dihalog_

Im-i-ta-tion, _arddulliad_, _tebygiad_

Im-me-di-ate, _digyfrwng_, _diattreg_

Im-mens-i-ty, _anfeidroldeb_

Im-mod-er-ate, _anghymmedrol_; _afresymol_

Im-mov-a-ble, _diysgog_, _ansymmudol_

Im-mu-ta-ble, _anghyfnewidiol_, _sicr_

Im-pal-pa-ble, _annheimladwy_

Im-ped-i-ment, _attalfa_, _rhwystr_

Im-per-a-tive, _gorchymmynol_; _archadwy_

Im-pe-ri-al, _amherodrawl_

Im-per-fec-tion, _ammherffeithrwydd_

Im-per-ti-nence, _ammherthynas_, _anfoesgarwch_

Im-per-ti-nent, _ammherthynasol_; _haerllug_

Im-pet-u-ous, _egniol_, _gorwyllt_, _ffyrnig_

Im-pla-ca-ble, _anghymmodadwy_; _anfodd_

Im-plic-it-ly, _o guddganlyniad_; _o ganlyniad_

Im-port-a-tion, _atgludiad_

Im-pos-i-tion, _arddodiad_, _ardrethiad_; _gormes_

Im-pos-si-ble, _annichonadwy_, _ammhosibl_

Im-preg-na-ble, _anoresgynadwy_

Im-pris-on-ment, _carchariad_

Im-prob-a-ble, _annhebygol_

Im-pu-ni-ty, _angherydd_, _anghosp_

Im-pu-ri-ty, _ammhuredd_, _aflendid_

Im-pu-ta-tion, _cyfrifiad_

In-ac-cu-rate, _anghywir_; _anghynnil_

In-ad-e-quate, _anghyfaddas_, _anghyfartal_

In-an-i-mate, _difywyd_, _marw_

In-ca-pa-ble, _analluog_, _anaddas_

In-car-cer-ate, _carcharu_, _caethiwo_

In-car-na-tion, _cnawdoliaeth_

In-cli-na-tion, _tueddiad_, _gogwyddiad_

In-co-he-rence, _anghydlyniad_, _anghysondeb_

In-cog-ni-to, _yn ddirgel_, _dan gel_

In-com-pe-tent, _anaddas_, _annigonol_

In-con-sist-ent, _anghydsafol_, _anghytunol_

In-con-ti-nence, _anniweirdeb_, _anymattal_

In-con-ti-nent, _anniwair_, _anllad_

In-cor-po-rate, _corffori_, _cyfuno_, _uno_

In-cred-i-ble, _anhygoel_, _anhygred_

In-crus-ta-tion, _crestiad_, _crawniad_

In-cu-ba-tion, _dëoriad_

In-cul-pa-ble, _difeus_, _difai_

In-cur-a-ble, _anwelladwy_; _anaele_

In-def-i-nite, _anmhenodol_

In-del-i-ble, _annilëadwy_

In-dem-ni-fy, _digolledu_, _sicrhau_

In-dem-ni-ty, _digollediad_; _diogeliad_

In-de-pend-ence, _annibyniaeth_

In-de-pend-ent, _annibynol_

In-di-ca-tion, _dangosiad_; _arwydd_, _nôd_

In-dic-a-tive, _mynegol_, _dangosiadol_

In-dif-fer-ence, _annhueddgarwch_, _difaterwch_, _oerfelgarwch_

In-dif-fer-ent, _annhueddgar_; _diofal_

In-di-ges-tion, _annhreuliad_

In-dig-na-tion, _digofaint_, _soriant_

In-dig-ni-ty, _anmharch_, _anfri_

In-dis-cre-tion, _annoethineb_

In-dus-tri-ous, _diwyd_, _llafurus_

In-e-bri-ate, _meddwi_, _brwysgo_

In-fal-li-ble, _anhyfeth_, _anffaeledig_

In-fe-ri-or, _isafiad_, _israddolwr_; _gwaelach_

In-fin-i-tive, _annherfynol_

In-firm-a-ry, _clafdy_, _ysbytty_

In-firm-i-ty, _gwendid_, _llesgedd_

In-flam-ma-tion, _fflammeg_, _ennynfa_

In-flam-ma-ble, _fflamychadwy_, _hylosg_

In-flex-i-ble, _anhyblyg_, _anystwyth_

In-flu-en-tial, _dylanwadol_, _cynhyrfol_

In-form-a-tion, _hysbysrwydd_; _addysg_

In-fu-ri-ate, _cynddeiriogwyllt_, _ffyrnig_

In-ge-ni-ous, _cywrain_, _athrylithus_

In-grat-i-tude, _anniolchgarwch_

In-gre-di-ent, _cyffyr_, _defnydd_

In-hab-it-ant, _trigiannydd_, _preswyliwr_

In-her-it-ance, _etifeddiaeth_, _treftadaeth_

In-ju-ri-ous, _camweddus_, _niweidiol_

In-i-qui-ty, _drygioni_, _anwiredd_

In-no-va-tion, _defod newidiad_

In-oc-u-late, _impio_, _bywyllu_; _gosod y frech wen_

In-of-fen-sive, _didramgwydd_, _diniwed_

In-qui-si-tion, _chwiliad_, _chwillŷs_

In-quis-i-tive, _ymofyngar_, _holgar_

In-sen-si-ble, _annheimladwy_

In-sid-i-ous, _dichellgar_, _twyllgar_

In-sin-u-ate, _truthymlusgo_, _gwenieithio_

In-sol-u-ble, _annhoddadwy_

In-solv-en-cy, _methdaliad_, _palldaliad_

In-spi-ra-tion, _anadliad_; _ysbrydoliaeth_

In-sti-ga-tion, _cymhelliad_, _annosiad_

In-sti-tu-tion, _gosodiad_, _sefydliad_

In-stru-ment-al, _offerynol_, _defnyddiol_

In-sur-rec-tion, _terfysg_, _gwrthryfel_

In-teg-ri-ty, _uniondeb_, _cywirdeb_

In-tel-li-gence, _dealltwriaeth_; _hysbysrwydd_

In-tel-li-gent, _deallgar_, _synwyrol_

In-tem-per-ance, _anhymer_, _anghymedroldeb_

In-tem-per-ate, _anhymerus_, _anghymedrol_

In-tens-i-ty, _dirfawredd_: _tynder_

In-ter-ces-sion, _cyfryngdod_, _eiriolaeth_

In-ter-ces-sor, _cyfryngwr_, _eiriolydd_

In-ter-est-ing, _pwysfawr_

In-ter-mis-sion, _dysbaid_, _hamdden_

In-ter-nal-ly, _yn dufewnol_

In-ter-ro-gate, _holi_, _gofyn_

In-ter-rup-tion, _rhwystr_, _aflonyddiad_

In-ter-sec-tion, _cynghroesiad_

In-ti-ma-cy, _cyfeillach_, _cydnabyddiaeth_

In-tim-i-date, _digaloni_, _peri ofn_

In-tox-i-cate, _meddwi_, _brwysgo_

In-tran-si-tive, _ansymmudol_, _didrosiad_

In-tri-ca-cy, _astrusi_, _dyryrswch_

In-tro-duc-tion, _rhagymmadrodd_; _rhaglith_

In-val-id-ate, _gwanhau_, _dirymu_

In-ven-to-ry, _dodrefnres_

In-ves-ti-gate, _olrhain_, _chwilio allan_

In-vet-er-ate, _hen_, _sefydlog_

In-vid-i-ous, _cenfigenus_; _atgas_

In-vig-or-ate, _cryfhau_, _bywioli_

In-vin-ci-ble, _anorchfygol_, _anorfod_

In-vis-i-ble, _anweledig_, _anhywel_

In-vi-ta-tion, _gwahoddiad_; _deniad_

In-un-da-tion, _llifddwfr_, _llifeiriant_

I-ron-i-cal, _gwawdieithiol_, _gwatwarus_

I-ron-mon-ger, _haiarn werthwr_

Ir-ra-di-ate, _pelydru_; _goleuo_

Ir-ra-tion-al, _direswm_, _anmhwyllog_

Ir-reg-u-lar, _annhrefnus_, _afreolus_

Ir-res-o-lute, _diymroad_, _anwadal_

Ir-ri-ta-tion, _anfoddogiad_, _cyffroad_

Is-o-lat-ed, _unigol_, _neillduedig_

I-tin-er-ant, _teithiwr_; _teithiol_

Jan-u-a-ry, _Ionawr_

Ju-di-ca-ture, _bradwriaeth_; _brawdlys_

Ju-ris-dic-tion, _awdurdodaeth_, _rhaglawiaeth_

Ju-ris-pru-dence, _deddfwybodaeth_

La-bo-ri-ous, _poenfawr_; _llafurus_

La-ment-a-ble, _galarus_, _gresynol_

La-ment-a-tion, _cwynfan_, _galar_, _galarnad_

Lap-i-da-ry, _gemydd_

Las-civ-i-ous, _anllad_, _nwyfus trythyll_

Leg-is-la-tion, _llywodraethiad_

Leg-is-la-tive, _llywodraeth_, _deddfwyr_

Le-git-i-mate, _cyfreithlawn_: _cyfreithloni_

Lim-it-a-tion, _terfyniad_; _ffin_, _cyffin_

Lit-er-a-ture, _llythyriant_, _llên_, _dysg_

Li-thog-ra-phy, _maengerfiad_

Lo-cal-i-ty, _lleoldeb_, _lleol_

Lo-co-mo-tion, _hunansymmudiad_

Lov-ing-kind-ness, _serch_, _rhad-lonedd_

Lu-min-a-ry, _goleugorff_, _arwawl_

Lux-u-ri-ance, _gormodedd_; _brasdyfiant_

Lux-u-ri-ant, _brasdyfol_, _rhyseddus_

Mag-nif-i-cence, _mawredd_, _ardderchawgrwydd_

Mag-nif-i-cent, _mawrwych_, _ardderchog_

Ma-jor-i-ty, _mwyafiaeth_, _y rhan fwyaf_

Mal-e-dic-tion, _melldith_, _rheg_

Mal-e-fac-tor, _drwgweithredwr_

Ma-lig-ni-ty, _dryganian_, _drygedd_

Mal-le-a-ble, _morthwyliadwy_

Man-i-fes-to, _ardystiad cyhoeddus_, _cylchlythyr_

Man-u-fac-ture, _llaw-waith_; _gwaith_

Ma-te-ri-al, _defnyddiol_, _sylweddol_; _pwysfawr_; _hanfodol_

Ma-te-ri-als, _defnyddiau_, _moddion_

Math-e-mat-ics, _gwyddoniaeth_, _meidri_

Mat-ri-mo-ny, _priodas_, _cydieuad_

Ma-tu-ri-ty, _addfedrwydd_; _llawn dyfiad_

Me-di-a-tor, _cyfryngwr_, _canolwr_

Me-di-a-tion, _cyfryngdod_

Med-i-ta-tion, _myfyrdod_, _ystyriaeth_

Mel-an-cho-ly, _pruddglwyf_, _y ddueg_

Me-lo-di-ous, _perseiniol_, _peroriaethol_

Mem-o-ra-ble, _cofiadwy_, _cofus_; _hynod_

Mem-o-ran-dum, _cofnod_, _cofnodiad_

Me-mo-ri-al, _cofen_, _cofiaeth_, _coffadwriaeth_

Men-su-ra-tion, _mesuriaeth_, _mesureg_

Mer-ce-na-ry, _cyflogddyn_; _cyflogaidd_; _hunanus_

Me-rid-i-an, _canolddydd_; _llinell y canolddydd_

Met-a-mor-phose, _dullnewidio_

Met-a-phys-ics, _athronau_, _arddansoddau_

Me-trop-o-lis, _mamddinas_, _prifddinas_

Mil-i-ta-ry, _milwraidd_, _rhyfelgar_

Mi-nor-i-ty, _maboed_, _mebyd_, _nifer lleiaf_

Mis-cel-la-ny, _amrywiaeth_; _amrywdeb_

Mis-be-hav-iour, _camymddygiad_, _anfoes_

Mis-de-mean-or, _camymddygiad_

Mis-er-a-ble, _gresynol_; _crintach_

Mis-sion-a-ry, _cenadwr_; _cenadol_

Mod-er-a-tion, _cymmedroldeb_; _gweddoldeb_

Mod-u-la-tion, _cyweiriad y llais_, _cynghaneddiad_

Mol-est-a-tion, _aflonyddwch_, _blinder_

Mo-ment-a-ry, _cythrymol_, _diflanedig_

Mon-as-ter-y, _mynachlog_, _mynachlys_

Mo-nop-o-ly, _gorfael_, _edwicaeth_

Mo-ral-i-ty, _moesolaeth_, _moesoldeb_

Mor-tal-i-ty, _marwoldeb_, _marw_

Mu-nic-i-pal, _breiniol_, _bwrdeisiol_

Mu-nif-i-cence, _haelder_, _hael-lioni_

Mu-nif-i-cent, _hael_, _cedrwys_

Mys-te-ri-ous, _dirgel_, _tywyll_, _aneglur_

Myth-ol-o-gy, _chwedlddysg_

Na-tiv-i-ty, _genedigaeth_

Nav-i-ga-tion, _mordwyaeth_, _llongiadaeth_

Ne-ces-sa-ry, _rhaid_, _rheidiol_, _angenrheidiol_

Ne-ces-si-ty, _angenrhaid_, _rhaid_

Nec-ro-man-cy, _gorcheiniaeth_

Ne-fa-ri-ous, _anfad_, _drygionus_

Ne-go-ti-ate, _gorchwylio_; _cyflafareddu_

Nev-er-the-less, _pa fodd bynag_, _etto_, _er hyny_

No-bil-i-ty, _bonedd_; _pendefigion_

Nom-in-a-tion, _enwad_, _penodiad_

Nom-in-a-tive, _enwedigol_

Non-con-form-ist, _anghydffurfiwr_

Non-en-ti-ty, _dihanfodedd_, _diddim_

No-to-ri-ous, _honaid_, _carn_, _hysbys_

Not-with-stand-ing, _er hyny_, _etto_, _anllai_

Nu-mer-a-tion, _rhifiant_, _rhifedigaeth_

O-be-di-ence, _ufudd-dod_; _gwarogaeth_

O-be-di-ent, _ufudd_; _darostyngedig_

Ob-li-ga-tion, _dyled_, _rhwymedigaeth_

Ob-lit-er-ate, _dadlythyru_, _dadoliaw_

Ob-scu-ri-ty, _tywyllni_, _anenwogrwydd_

Ob-serv-a-ble, _nodadwy_, _hynod_

Ob-serv-a-tion, _sylw_, _sylwad_, _nodiad_

Ob-sti-na-cy, _cildynrwydd_, _ystyfnigrwydd_

Ob-tain-a-ble, _cyrhaeddadwy_

Oc-ca-sion-al, _achlysurol_, _damweiniol_

Oc-ci-dent-al, _gorllewinol_

Oc-cu-pa-tion, _meddianniad_; _galwedigaeth_

Of-fi-ci-ate, _gweinidogaethu_

Ol-i-gar-chy, _ambellenigaeth_

Om-nip-o-tence, _hollalluogrwydd_, _'ollallu_

Om-nip-o-tent, _ollnerthog_, _hollalluog_

Om-ni-pres-ence, _hollbresenoldeb_

Om-ni-pres-ent, _hollbresenol_

Op-er-a-tion, _gweithrediad_; _meddygwaith_

Op-po-si-tion, _gwrthwynebiad_

Or-a-to-ry, _areithyddiaeth_

Or-di-na-ry, _rhaglaw esgob_; _bwydfa cyffredin_

Or-di-na-tion, _gosodiad_; _urddiad_

O-ri-ent-al, _dwyreiniwr_; _dwyreiniol_

O-rig-i-nal, _cynysgrif_; _dechreuol_, _gwreiddiol_

O-rig-in-ate, _dechreu_; _tarddu_, _hanu_

Or-na-ment-al, _addurnol_, _addurniadol_

Or-thog-ra-phy, _llythyreniad_; _orgraff_

Os-ten-si-ble, _dangosadwy_; _ymddangosol_

Os-ten-ta-tion, _rhodres_, _gwagymddangosiad_

Os-ten-ta-tious, _rhodresol_; _ymffrostgar_

O-ver-flow-ing, _gorllawndid_, _gorlifiad_

O-ver-look-er, _arolygydd_

O-ver-shad-ow, _argysgodi_, _arhuddo_

O-vip-a-rous, _dodŵyol_, _dodŵynog_

Pal-a-ta-ble, _chwaethus_, _blasus_

Pal-pi-ta-tion, _dychlamiad_; _curiad_

Pa-ren-the-sis, _cromfachau_ (); _ymsang_

Pa-ro-chi-al, _plwyfol_

Par-si-mo-ny, _crintachrwydd_, _cynnildeb_

Par-tic-i-pate, _cyfranogi_, _cael rhan_

Par-ti-ci-ple, _cyfrannai_, _rhangymmeriad_

Par-tic-u-lar, _pwngc_, _neillduolyn_; _penodol_, _neillduol_

Pat-ri-mo-ny, _treftad_, _treftadaeth_

Peace-of-fer-ing, _heddaberth_

Pe-nin-su-la, _gorynys_

Per-ad-vent-ure, _ysgatfydd_, _efallai_

Per-ceiv-a-ble, _dirnadwy_, _canfodadwy_

Per-en-ni-al, _blwyddbaräol_

Per-fo-ra-tion, _trydwll_, _trydylliad_

Per-ish-a-ble, _brau_, _darfodadwy_

Per-mu-ta-tion, _trynewidiaeth_, _cyfnewidiaeth_

Per-pet-u-al, _parhaol_, _gwastadol_

Per-pet-u-ate, _bytholi_, _tragwyddoli_

Per-plex-i-ty, _dyryswch_; _petrusder_

Per-se-cu-tion, _erledigaeth_

Per-se-ver-ance, _parhâd_, _dyfalbara_

Per-son-i-fy, _ansodi_, _dynsodi_, _persenoli_

Per-spic-u-ous, _amlwg_, _eglur_

Per-spi-ra-tion, _chwys_, _tarthiad trwodd_

Pe-ti-tion-er, _erfyniwr_, _eirchiad_

Phe-nom-e-non, _ymddangosiad_; _argoel_

Phi-lan-thro-py, _dyngarwch_

Phi-los-o-phy, _athrolith_, _athroniaeth_

Phre-nol-o-gy, _ymenddysg_, _pendraith_

Po-et-i-cal, _awenawl_, _barddonol_

Po-lit-i-cal, _gwladwriaethol_; _dinasol_

Po-ly-ga-my, _amlbriodas_

Pop-u-la-tion, _poblogiad_; _poblogaeth_

Pos-ter-i-ty, _olafiad_; _hiliogaeth_

Pre-ca-ri-ous, _ansicr_, _ansafadwy_

Pre-cip-i-tate, _chwyrndaflu_; _penchwidro_

Pre-cur-so-ry, _blaenorol_, _blaenawl_

Pred-e-ces-sor, _rhagredwr_, _rhagflaenor_

Pre-des-ti-nate, _rhaglunio_

Pre-dic-a-ment, _cyflwr_, _helynt_, _sefyllfa_

Pre-dom-in-ance, _goruchafiaeth_

Pre-dom-in-ant, _penaf_, _trechaf_

Pre-dom-in-ate, _gorchafu_, _gorchfygu_

Pre-em-i-nence, _rhagoriaeth_

Pre-em-i-nent, _rhagorol_, _ardderchog_

Pre-fer-a-ble, _gwell_, _rhagorach_

Pre-med-i-tate, _rhagfyfyrio_

Prep-a-ra-tion, _paratoad_, _darpariad_

Prep-o-si-tion, _arddodiad_, _rhagair_

Pres-ent-a-tion, _cyflwyniad_; _rhoddiad_

Pres-er-va-tion, _cadwraeth_, _cadwad_

Pres-i-den-cy, _arglwyddiaeth_, _rheolaeth_

Pre-sump-tu-ous, _beiddgar_, _rhyfygus_

Pre-vi-ous-ly, _ym mlaenllaw_

Pri-ma-ri-ly, _yn gyntaf_, _yn benaf_

Pri-or-i-ty, _blaenoriaeth_; _cyndawd_

Proc-la-ma-tion, _cyhoeddiad_

Pro-cras-ti-nate, _oedi_, _gohirio_

Pro-cur-a-ble, _cyrhaeddadwy_, _caffaeladwy_

Prof-it-a-ble, _buddiol_, _llesol_, _ennillfawr_

Prof-li-ga-cy, _anfadedd_

Pro-gen-i-tor, _hynafiad_; _cenedlawr_

Pro-hi-bi-tion, _gwarafuniad_

Pro-lon-ga-tion, _estyniad_, _addoediad_

Pro-mis-cu-ous, _cymmysg_, _plithtraphlith_

Prom-is-so-ry, _addawedigol_, _addewidiol_

Pro-mul-ga-tion, _cyhoeddiad_, _hysbysiad_

Pro-nom-i-nal, _rhagenwawl_

Pro-pen-si-ty, _tueddiad_, _tueddfryd_

Prop-o-si-tion, _testun_; _gosodiad_

Pro-pri-e-tor, _meddiannydd_

Pro-pri-e-ty, _priodoldeb_, _cymhwysder_

Pros-e-cu-tion, _canlyniad_, _erlyniad_

Pros-per-i-ty, _ffyniant_, _llwyddiant_

Pros-ti-tu-tion, _puteindra_, _ymwerthiad_

Prot-est-a-tion, _gorchwiriad_, _ardystiad_

Pro-tu-ber-ance, _oddf_, _crwmp_; _chwydd_

Pro-tu-ber-ant, _hwrwgawl_, _oddfawg_

Pro-verb-i-al, _diarebawl_, _direbawl_

Prov-i-den-tial, _rhagluniaethol_

Prov-o-ca-tion, _annogiant_, _cynhyrfol_

Prox-im-i-ty, _agosrwydd_, _nesder_

Pub-li-ca-tion, _cyhoeddiad_

Punc-tu-a-tion, _gwahan-nodiad_

Pur-ga-to-ry, _purdan_

Pu-ri-fi-er, _purwr_, _coethwr_

Pu-tre-fac-tion, _braeniad_, _malldod_

Pu-tre-fy-ing, _braenllyd_, _crawnllyd_

Ra-di-a-tion, _pelydriad_, _paladriad_

Ra-pid-i-ty, _chwyrnder_

Ra-re-fy-ing, _yn teneuo_, _teneuawl_

Ra-tion-al-ly, _yn rhesymol_

Re-al-i-ty, _gwirionedd_; _sylweddoledd_

Rea-son-a-ble, _rhesymol_, _teg_, _cymhwys_

Re-ceiv-a-ble, _derbyniadwy_

Re-cep-ta-cle, _derbynfa_; _cuddfa_

Re-cip-i-ent, _derbyniedydd_, _derbynydd_

Re-cip-ro-cal, _adgyrchiol_, _cylchgyfnewidiol_

Rec-i-ta-tion, _mynegiaeth_

Re-cog-ni-zance, _cydnabyddiaeth_

Rec-og-ni-tion, _cydnabyddiad_

Rec-ol-lec-tion, _adgofiant_, _adfeddiol_

Re-con-noi-tre, _llygadolrhain_, _adolygu_

Re-cov-er-y, _adgaffaeliad_, _gwelliant_

Rec-re-a-tion, _adloniad_, _difyrwch_

Rec-ti-fi-er, _uniawnydd_, _cywirydd_

Re-en-force-ment, _adgyfnerthiad_

Re-form-a-tion, _diwygiad_, _adffurfiad_

Re-frac-to-ry, _anhydyn_, _cyndyn_

Re-ga-li-a, _teyrnaddurnau_, _teyrndrec_

Re-gen-er-ate, _adgenedlu_, _aileni_

Reg-i-ment-al, _catrodawl_, _byddinol_

Reg-i-ment-als, _byddinwisg_

Reg-u-la-tion, _trefniad_, _rheol_

Reg-u-la-tor, _trefnwr_, _cymmedrolydd_

Re-im-burse-ment, _atdaliad_

Re-it-er-ate, _ad-drethu_, _mynychu_

Re-lax-a-tion, _llacad_; _seibiant_

Re-lax-a-tive, _ymollyngol_, _llacäol_

Re-mark-a-ble, _nodadwy_, _hynod_

Re-mov-a-ble, _symmudadwy_, _mudadwy_

Re-mu-ner-ate, _gwobrwyo_, _atdalu_

Ren-o-va-tion, _adnewyddiad_

Rep-a-ra-ble, _cyweiradwy_

Rep-a-ra-tion, _adgyweiriad_; _iawn_

Re-peat-ed-ly, _yn fynych_, _yn aml_

Rep-e-ti-tion, _adroddiad_, _ailadroddiad_

Re-proach-a-ble, _gwaradwyddadwy_

Rep-ro-ba-tion, _gwrthodedigaeth_

Re-prov-a-ble, _ceryddadwy_, _beiadwy_

Re-pub-lic-an, _gweriniaethwr_; _gweriniaethol_

Re-pu-di-ate, _rhoi ymaith_, _ysgar_

Rep-u-ta-tion, _bri_, _cymmeriad_, _cyfrifiad_

Re-qui-si-tion, _gofyniad_, _galwad_

Res-er-va-tion, _adgadwad_; _darngeliad_

Res-ig-na-tion, _rhoddiad i fyny_

Re-sist-i-ble, _gwrthwynebadwy_

Res-o-lu-tion, _bwriad_, _llawnfryd_, _penderfyniad_

Re-spect-a-ble, _parchus_, _gwiwbarch_

Res-pi-ra-tion, _anadliad_, _adanadl_

Re-spons-i-ble, _attebadwy_, _attebol_

Res-to-ra-tion, _adferiad_, _edfryd_

Res-ti-tu-tion, _adferiad_, _edfrydiad_

Res-ur-rec-tion, _adgyfodiad_

Re-tal-i-ate, _gwrthbwytho_, _dial cam_

Ret-ri-bu-tion, _atdal_, _atdaliad_

Rev-e-la-tion, _datguddiad_, _diargeliad_

Re-verb-er-ate, _gwrthdaro_, _dadseinio_

Rev-o-lu-tion, _chwyl_, _chwyldroad_

Ri-dic-u-lous, _chwerthinus_; _dirmygus_

Ro-ta-to-ry, _cylchawl_, _cylchdroawl_

Ro-tun-di-ty, _crynder_, _bolawd_

Ru-in-a-tion, _andwyad_, _dyfethiad_

Sa-gac-i-ty, _callder_, _doethbwyll_

Sal-i-va-tion, _poerlifiant_, _haliwiad_

Sa-lu-bri-ous, _iachus_, _iachusol_

Sa-lu-bri-ty, _iachusrwydd_

Sal-u-ta-ry, _iachus_, _iechydawl_

Sal-u-ta-tion, _annerchiad_, _cyfarchiad_

Sanc-tu-a-ry, _cyssegr_, _cyssegrfa_

Sa-ti-e-ty, _gwala_, _digon_, _diwallrwydd_

Sat-is-fac-tion, _boddlonrwydd_; _iawn_

Sat-u-ra-tion, _llanwad_, _diwalliad_

Sci-en-tif-ic, _gwybodus_, _celfyddgar_

Sea-son-a-ble, _tymoraidd_, _amserol_, _prydlawn_

Sec-ond-a-ry, _ail_, _o'r ail radd_

Sec-re-ta-ry, _ysgrifenydd_, _ysgrifraglaw_

Se-cu-ri-ty, _diogelwch_; _gwystl_; _sicrwydd_

Sed-en-ta-ry, _eisteddawg_, _eisteddol_

Se-du-li-ty, _dyfalrwydd_, _diwydrwydd_

Self-de-cep-tion, _hunandwyll_

Self-ev-i-dence, _hunanrith_, _hunnandyst_

Sem-i-cir-cle, _hannergylch_

Sem-i-co-lon, _rhagwahanod_ (;)

Sem-in-a-ry, _hadfa_, _magfa_; _ysgol_

Sen-ti-ment-al, _synwyrol_, _ystyriol_

Sep-a-ra-tion, _gwahaniad_; _gwahaniaeth_

Sep-ten-ni-al, _seithmlwyddol_

Se-ren-i-ty, _claerdegwch_, _sirioldeb_

Ser-vice-a-ble, _gwasanaethgar_, _buddiol_

Ser-vil-i-ty, _gwaseidd-dra_; _gorwaelder_

Sev-er-al-ly, _ar wahan_, _yn neillduol_

Sig-nif-i-cance, _arwyddocâd_; _pwysigrwydd_

Sig-nif-i-cant, _arwyddocaol_; _pwysfawr_

Si-mil-i-tude, _cyffelybiaeth_, _cyffelybrwydd_

Sim-plic-i-ty, _symlant_, _symylrwydd_

Sin-cer-i-ty, _cywir_, _diragrithrwydd_

Sin-u-a-tion, _doleniad_, _ystumiad_

Sit-u-a-tion, _sefyllfa_, _gosodiad_; _cyflwr_

So-bri-e-ty, _sobrwydd_; _cymmedroldeb_; _difrifwch_

So-ci-a-ble, _cyfeillgar_, _cymdeithasol_

So-ci-e-ty, _cymdeithas_; _cyfeillach_

So-lem-ni-ty, _edmygedd_, _difrifddwysder_

So-lic-i-tor, _erfyniwr_; _dirprwywr_

So-lic-i-tous, _gofalus_, _pryderus_

So-lic-i-tude, _gofal_, _cur_, _pryder_

So-lid-i-ty, _cyfander_, _sadrwydd_, _sylwedd_

So-lil-o-quy, _hunanymddiddan_, _ymson_

Sol-i-ta-ry, _unig_; _disathr_

Spec-u-la-tion, _brydsylliad_, _rhagdremiad_

Spec-u-la-tive, _golygiadol_, _golygiedigiol_

Spi-nal-mar-row, _madruddyn_

Spir-it-u-al, _ysbrydol_

Spir-it-u-ous, _poethgryf_, _gwirodawl_

Spon-ta-ne-ous, _gwirfoddawl_

Sta-bil-i-ty, _sefydlogrwydd_, _cadernid_

Stand-ard-bear-er, _llumanwr_, _banerwr_

Sta-tion-a-ry, _sefydlog_, _gorsafawl_

Stat-u-a-ry, _delwedydd_

Ster-e-o-type, _ystrydeb_

Ste-ril-i-ty, _diffrwythder_

Stim-u-la-tion, _symbyliad_

Stip-u-la-tion, _ammod_, _ammodiad_

Sub-ju-ga-tion, _dygiad dan iau_

Sub-lim-i-ty, _ucheledd_

Sub-or-din-ate, _israddol_

Sub-se-quent-ly, _yn ganlynol_, _yn ddilynol_

Sub-serv-i-ence, _iswasanaeth_

Sub-serv-i-ent, _gwasanaethgar_

Sub-sti-tu-tion, _dirprwyosodiad_

Suf-fi-cien-cy, _digonedd_, _digonoldeb_

Suf-fo-ca-tion, _mygiad_, _tagiad_

Suf-fo-ca-tive, _mygawl_, _tagiadol_

Suit-a-ble-ness, _cyfaddasrwydd_

Sump-tu-a-ry, _traulgymmedryddol_

Su-per-a-bound, _gormodol_

Su-per-fi-cial, _arwynebol_; _ansylweddol_

Su-per-fi-cies, _arwynebydd_, _clawr_

Su-per-flu-ous, _gormod_, _gormodd_

Su-per-in-tend, _arolygu_, _goruchwyliad_

Su-pe-ri-or, _uwch_, _uwchlaw_, _goruwch_

Su-pe-ri-ors, _blaenoriaid_, _uchafiaid_

Su-per-la-tive, _uchaf_, _uchelaf_

Su-per-scrip-tion, _argraff_, _arlythyriad_

Su-per-sti-tion, _coelgrefydd_, _ofergoel_

Su-per-sti-tious, _coelgrefyddol_, _ofergoelus_

Su-per-vis-or, _ucholygwr_, _arolygydd_

Sup-pli-ca-tion, _deisyfiad_, _ymbiliad_

Sup-po-si-tion, _tyb_; _amcanfwriad_

Su-prem-a-cy, _uwchafiaeth_, _goruchedd_

Sur-mount-a-ble, _gorchfygadwy_

Sus-cep-ti-ble, _derbyngar_; _teimladol_

Sym-met-ri-cal, _cydefsurol_, _cydluniaidd_

Sy-non-y-mous, _cyfystyr_, _cyfenwedig_

Sys-tem-at-ic, _rheolaidd_

Tab-er-na-cle, _pabell_; _trigfan_

Tem-per-a-ment, _tymheredd_; _cyfnaws_

Tem-per-a-ture, _ardymher_, _naws_

Tem-pest-u-ous, _tymhestlog_, _ystormus_

Tem-po-ra-ry, _dros amser_, _amserol_

Te-nac-i-ty, _gafaelgarwch_, _ymlyniad_

Ter-min-a-tion, _diweddiad_, _dybeniad_

Ter-ra-que-ous, _dwfrddaiarol_

Ter-res-tri-al, _daiarol_

Ter-ri-to-ry, _tiriogaeth_; _rhaglawiaeth_

Tes-ti-mo-ny, _tystiolaeth_; _galwad_

The-ol-o-gist, _duwinydd_

The-ol-o-gy, _duwinyddiaeth_, _duwineb_

Ti-mid-i-ty, _ofnusrwydd_, _aneondra_

Tol-er-a-ble, _goddefadwy_, _canolig_

Tol-er-a-tion, _goddefiad_, _caniatâd_

Tor-pid-i-ty, _marweidd-dra_, _cysgadrwydd_

Tra-di-tion-al, _traddodiadol_, _trosglwyddol_

Tran-quil-li-ty, _tawelwch_, _llonyddwch_

Trans-fer-a-ble, _trosglwyddadwy_

Trans-form-a-tion, _ffurfnewidiad_

Trans-pa-ren-cy, _trylowyder_

Trans-port-a-tion, _dëoliad_, _alltudiaeth_

Trans-po-si-tion, _trawsddodiad_

Trib-u-la-tion, _trallod_, _cystudd_, _cyfyngder_

Trib-u-ta-ry, _teyrnged-dalwr_; _trethol_

Tri-en-ni-al, _tairblynyddol_

Tu-mult-u-ous, _terfysgus_, _afreolus_

Ty-ran-ni-cal, _gormesol_, _gorthrymus_

Ul-te-ri-or, _pellach_; _pellaf_

Ul-ti-mate-ly, _o'r diwedd_, _yn olaf_

Ul-ti-ma-tum, _yr olaf_, _ôlgynnyg_

U-nan-i-mous, _unfryd_, _cydsyniol_, _cytun_

Un-be-com-ing, _anweddaidd_, _anaddas_

Un-be-liev-er, _angrhedadyn_, _anffyddiwr_

Un-cer-tain-ty, _anscirwydd_; _anwadalwch_

Un-change-a-ble, _anghyfnewidiol_, _sefydlog_

Un-der-stand-ing, _deall_, _dealltwriaeth_

Un-der-tak-er, _ymgymerwr_, _cymerwr_

Un-der-tak-ing, _gorchwyl_, _ymgymeriad_

Un-der-val-ue, _dibrisio_, _difrïo_

Un-der-writ-er, _ymrwymwr_, _digolliannwr_

Un-dis-put-ed, _diamheuol_, _diddadl_

Un-du-lat-ed, _rhithdonog_, _ar wedd tonau_

Un-du-la-tion, _tonogiad_

Un-du-ti-ful, _anufudd_, _anufuddgar_

Un-ea-si-ness, _anesmwythder_, _anhawsder_

Un-ex-pect-ed, _annysgwyliedig_

Un-for-giv-ing, _anfaddeuol_, _annhrugarog_

Un-for-sak-en, _heb ei adaw_, _heb ei adu_

Un-for-tu-nate, _anffodiog_, _anhapus_

U-ni-ver-sal, _cyffredinol_, _hollol_

Un-lim-it-ed, _diderfyn_, _anmhennodol_

Un-mer-ci-ful, _annhrugarog_

Un-pro-pi-tious, _annhosturiol_, _digyfrwydd_

Un-quench-a-ble, _anniffoddadwy_

Un-search-a-ble, _anchwiliadwy_

Un-speak-a-ble, _annhraethadwy_

Un-stead-i-ness, _anwadalwch_, _ansadrwydd_

Un-suc-cess-ful, _aflwyddiannus_, _anffodus_

Un-us-u-al, _anarferol_, _anghyffredin_

U-sur-pa-tion, _trawsfeddiant_, _camrwysg_

U-til-i-ty, _defnyddioldeb_, _budd_, _lles_

Ut-ter-a-ble, _traethadwy_, _dywedadwy_

Val-e-dic-tion, _iacheirchiad_

Va-lid-i-ty, _cadernid_, _grym_, _nerth_

Val-u-a-ble, _gwerthfawr_, _prid_

Val-u-a-tion, _cywerthyddiad_, _prisiad_

Vap-o-ra-tion, _tarthiad_, _mwgdarthiad_

Va-ri-a-ble, _ansefydlog_, _cyfnewidiol_

Va-ri-a-tion, _amrafaeliad_; _gwyrad_

Va-ri-e-gate, _amryliwio_; _amrywio_

Va-ri-e-ty, _amrywiaeth_; _newid_

Veg-e-ta-ble, _llysieyn_; _llysieuog_, _tyfawl_

Veg-e-ta-tion, _hydyfiant_, _tyfiad llysiau_

Ve-loc-i-ty, _buander_, _cyflymdra_

Ven-er-a-ble, _hybarch_, _parchus_

Ven-er-a-tion, _anrhydedd_, _dyfriad_

Ven-ti-la-tion, _gwyntylliad_, _nithiad_

Ven-ti-la-tor, _gwyntyll_, _gwyntydd_

Ven-tril-o-quist, _bol-lafarwr_

Ve-rac-i-ty, _geirwiredd_; _gwirionedd_

Vi-ca-ri-ous, _dirprwyol_

Vi-cin-i-ty, _cymmydogaeth_: _agosrwydd_

Vi-cis-si-tude, _cyfnewidioldeb_, _cylchdroad_

Vic-to-ri-ous, _buddugawl_, _gorchfygol_

Vin-di-ca-tion, _amddiffyniad_

Vin-di-ca-tor, _amddiffynwr_, _diffynwr_

Vin-di-ca-tive, _dïaleddol_, _dïalgar_

Vi-o-la-tion, _toriad_; _treisiad_, _halogiad_

Vir-gin-i-ty, _morwyndod_; _diweirdeb_

Vir-tu-al-ly, _mewn effaith_, _yn weithredol_

Vis-it-a-tion, _ymweliad_, _gofwy_

Vi-vac-i-ty, _bywiogrwyddd_, _hawnt_

Vi-vip-a-rous, _bywhiliog_

Vo-cif-er-ous, _bloeddfawr_, _banllefol_

Vol-un-ta-ry, _gwirfoddol_, _ewyllysgar_

Vo-lup-tu-ous, _glwth_, _gloth_, _glythig_

Vul-gar-i-ty, _difoesedd_

Whence-so-ev-er, _o ba le bynag_

When-so-ev-er, _pa bryd bynag_

Where-so-ev-er, _pa le bynag_

Whom-so-ev-er, _pwy bynag_

Whose-so-ev-er, _pwy bynag_

Zo-ol-o-gy, _milhanes_, _mildraethawd_




WORDS OF FIVE SYLLABLES.



Ab-bre-vi-a-tion, _byrhâd_, _talfyriad_, _darnair_

A-bom-in-a-ble, _ffiaidd_, _atgas_

A-bom-in-a-tion, _ffieiddiant_, _atgasrwydd_

Ab-o-rig-i-nes, _cynfrodorion_

Ac-cel-er-a-tion, _prysuriad_, _cyflymiad_

Ac-ci-dent-al-ly, _yn ddamweiniol_

Ac-com-mo-da-tion, _addasiad_, _cyfaddasiad_; _lletty_, _cyfleusdra_

Ac-cu-mu-la-tion, _tyriad_, _pentyriad_

Ad-min-is-tra-tion,  _gwasanaethiad_, _gweinyddiaeth_; _trefniad_

A-dul-ter-a-tion, _gwaethygiad_; _godineb_

An-i-mos-i-ty, _dygasedd_, _gelyniaeth_

Ar-is-toc-ra-cy, _pendefigaeth_; _y pendefigion_

Ar-tic-u-la-tion, _llafariad_, _seiniad_

As-sas-sin-a-tion, _murniad_, _bradlofruddiad_

As-si-du-i-ty, _dyfalwch_, _diwydrwydd_

As-so-ci-a-tion, _cymdeithasiad_, _cymmanfa_

Ca-pa-bil-i-ty, _gallu_, _galluogrwydd_

Cer-e-mo-ni-al, _defodlyfr_; _defodol_

Cer-e-mo-ni-ous, _defodgar_; _ffurfiol_

Char-ac-ter-is-tic, _nodwedd_; _nodweddol_

Cir-cum-lo-cu-tion, _cylchymadrodd_

Civ-il-i-za-tion, _gwareiddiad_, _moesoliad_

Com-mem-o-ra-tion, _cyfargofiant_, _coffâd_

Com-mis-er-a-tion, _tosturi_, _trugaredd_

Com-mu-ni-ca-tion, _cyfraniad_; _ffordd_, _cyfrwng_

Con-fed-er-a-cy, _cyngrair_; _cyfammod_

Con-sid-er-a-ble, _o bwys_; _pwysig_

Con-sid-er-a-tion, _ystyriaeth_; _cyfrifoldeb_

Con-sol-i-da-tion, _cyfaniad_, _cydsylweddiad_

Con-tem-po-ra-ry, _cyfoed_, _cydoeswr_; _cyfoesol_

Cred-i-bil-i-ty, _gwiwgoeledd_, _coeledigaeth_

Cu-ri-os-i-ty, _manylwch_, _cywreinrwydd_

Del-e-te-ri-ous, _dinystriol_, _adwythig_

De-lib-er-a-tion, _pwyllogrwydd_, _ystyriaeth_

De-lin-e-a-tion, _darluniad_; _llinelliad_

De-nom-i-na-tion, _enw_; _enwad_; _plaid_

De-nun-ci-a-tion, _cyhoeddiad_; _traethiad_

De-pos-i-ta-ry, _adneuwr_; _ymddiriedai_

De-pos-i-to-ry, _ystorfa_, _ystorgell_

De-sid-er-a-tum, _dymunolbeth_; _chwennychbeth_

De-ter-i-o-rate, _gwaethygu_; _gwanhau_

De-ter-mi-na-tion, _penderfyniad_; _bwriad_; _diweddiad_

Di-lap-i-da-tion, _adfeiliad_; _dystryw_

Dis-a-bil-i-ty, _anallu_, _gwendid_

Dis-ad-van-ta-geous, _anfanteisiol_; _anfuddiol_

Dis-a-gree-a-ble, _anhyfryd_; _diflas_

Dis-ap-pro-ba-tion, _anghymmeradwyaeth_

Dis-crim-in-a-tion, _gwahaniaeth_; _gwahannodiad_

Dis-in-cli-na-tion, _annhuedd_, _anewyllysgarwch_

Dis-in-ter-est-ed, _diduedd_; _ammhleidgar_

Dis-o-be-di-ent, _anufudd_, _cyndyn_

Dis-sim-u-la-tion, _ffuant_, _rhagrith_

Ec-cen-tric-i-ty, _echreiddigrwydd_, _afreoleiddrwydd_

Ec-cle-si-as-tic, _gwr eglwysig_, _eglwyswr_

E-co-nom-i-cal, _trefniadol_; _cynnil_

Ed-i-fi-ca-tion, _adeiladaeth_; _addysgiad_

E-lec-tri-ci-ty, _trydan_, _trydaniaeth_

El-e-ment-a-ry, _elfenol_, _egwyddorol_

E-man-ci-pa-tion, _rhyddhâd_, _rhyddfreiniad_

E-nu-mer-a-tion, _rhifiad_, _cyfrifiad_

E-nun-ci-a-tion, _traethiad_; _hysbysiad_

E-qual-i-za-tion, _cyfartaledd_; _cystadliad_

E-qua-nim-i-ty, _gwastadfrydedd_

E-qui-lib-ri-um, _cydbwysedd_, _cydfantoledd_

Et-y-mol-o-gy, _geirdarddiad_; _gwraidd_

E-vac-u-a-tion, _gwaghâd_; _ymadawiad_

Ev-an-gel-i-cal, _efengylaidd_

E-vap-o-ra-tion, _tarthiad_, _ageriad_

Ex-ag-ger-a-tion, _mwyhâd_, _ychwanegiad_

Ex-am-i-na-tion, _holiad_, _ymofyniad_

Ex-as-per-a-tion, _llidiad_, _cyffroad_; _digofaint_

Ex-com-mu-ni-cate, _esgymmuno_; _diarddel_

Ex-e-cu-tion-er, _dienyddwr_; _crogwr_

Ex-per-i-ment-al, _profiadol_; _ymarferol_

Ex-pos-tu-la-tion, _ymliwiad_; _ymresymiad_

Ex-tem-po-ra-ry, _difyfyr_, _disymmwth_

Ex-ten-u-a-tion, _lleihâd_; _esgusodiad_

Ex-ter-mi-na-tion, _dadwreiddiad_; _dilead_

For-ti-fi-ca-tion, _caerwaith_; _amddiffynfa_

Gen-e-al-o-gy, _ach_, _llinach_; _achyddiaeth_

Gen-er-os-i-ty, _haelioni_, _rhoddgarwch_

Glo-ri-fi-ca-tion, _gogoneddiad_

Grat-i-fi-ca-tion, _boddhâd_; _taliad_

He-red-i-ta-ry, _etifeddawl_, _treftadawl_

Hos-pi-tal-i-ty, _llettygarwch_

Hu-mil-i-a-tion, _ymostyngiad_; _iselhâd_

Hy-dro-pho-bi-a, _cynddaredd_, _cynddeiriogrwydd_

Il-le-git-i-mate, _basdarddol_; _anghyfreithlawn_

Il-lu-mi-na-tion, _goleuad_, _llewyrchiad_

Im-ag-i-na-ry, _dychymmygol_; _tybiol_

Im-ag-i-na-tion, _dychymmyg_; _amgyffred_

Im-be-cil-i-ty, _eiddilwch_, _gwendid_

Im-ma-te-ri-al, _annefnyddiol_; _ysbrydol_

Im-meas-u-ra-ble, _anfesurol_; _difesur_

Im-me-di-ate-ly, _yn ddiaros_, _yn ddioed_

Im-me-mo-ri-al, _cyn cof_; _hen_

Im-mor-tal-i-ty, _anfarwoldeb_

Im-per-cep-ti-ble, _annirnadwy_, _anweladwy_

In-a-bil-i-ty, _anallu_, _annerth_

In-ac-tiv-i-ty, _diweithedd_, _anweithgarwch_

In-au-gu-ra-tion, _urddfreiniad_; _coroniad_

In-cal-cu-la-ble, _anghyfrifadwy_

In-ca-pac-i-tate, _anaddasu_

In-cen-di-a-ry, _ffaglydd_; _terfysgwr_

In-com-mo-di-ous, _anghyfleus_

In-com-pat-i-ble, _anghydweddol_

In-com-pe-ten-cy, _anghymwysder_

In-con-ceiv-a-ble, _annirnadwy_

In-con-sid-er-ate, _anystyriol_, _byrbwyll_

In-con-sist-en-cy, _anghydweddiad_

In-con-ve-ni-ence, _anghyfleusdra_

In-con-ve-ni-ent, _anghyfleus_

In-cor-po-ra-tion, _cydgorfforiad_

In-cor-ri-gi-ble, _anniwygiadwy_

In-cre-du-li-ty, _anghrediniaeth_

In-dis-crim-in-ate, _diwahân_

In-dis-po-si-tion, _anhwyl_; _annhuedd_

In-dis-pu-ta-ble, _diddadl_

In-di-vid-u-al, _un_, _undyn_, _un neillduol_

In-e-qual-i-ty, _anghyfartaledd_

In-e-qui-va-lent, _anghyfwerth_; _rhy fyr_

In-ev-i-ta-ble, _anocheladwy_

In-ex-cus-a-ble, _diesgus_

In-ex-pe-di-ence, _anaddasrwydd_

In-ex-pe-di-ent, _anghyfaddas_; _anaddas_; _anfuddiol_

In-ex-pe-ri-ence, _diffyg ymbrawf_; _anymarferiaeth_

In-fi-del-i-ty, _anffyddiaeth_

In-ge-nu-i-ty, _cywreinrwydd_

In-hu-man-i-ty, _creulondeb_, _cieidd-dra_

In-im-i-ta-ble, _anefelychadwy_; _rhagorol_

In-nu-mer-a-ble, _aneirif_, _afrifed_

In-oc-u-la-tion, _llygadimpiad_

In-sep-a-ra-ble, _anwahanadwy_

In-sig-nif-i-cance, _ansylwedd_

In-sig-nif-i-cant, _disylwedd_, _dibwys_

In-sin-u-a-tion, _truthymlusgiad_

In-sta-bil-i-ty, _anwadalwch_

In-stan-ta-ne-ous, _cythrymol_, _disyfyd_

In-suf-fer-a-ble, _annyoddefadwy_

In-sur-mount-a-ble, _anorchfygadwy_

In-tel-lect-u-al, _deallawl_, _dealledigol_

In-tel-li-gi-ble, _dealladwy_

In-ter-lo-cu-tion, _cydsiarad_

In-ter-pre-ta-tion, _dehongliad_

In-ter-ro-ga-tion, _holiad_; _nod o holiad_ (?)

In-tol-er-a-ble, _anoddefadwy_

In-tox-i-ca-tion, _meddwdod_

In-tre-pid-i-ty, _glewder_, _dewrder_

In-val-u-a-ble, _uwchlaw gwerth_, _tragwerthfawr_

In-va-ri-a-ble, _digyfnewid_

In-ves-ti-ga-tion, _olrheiniad_

In-vol-un-ta-ry, _anfoddus_, _anewyllysgar_

Ir-re-proach-a-ble, _difefl_, _diwarth_

Ir-re-sist-i-ble, _anwrthwynebol_

Ju-di-ca-to-ry, _brawdle_, _llys barn_

Jus-ti-fi-ca-tion, _cyfiawnhad_

Jux-ta-po-si-tion, _cyferbyniad_

Lab-o-ra-to-ry, _gweithdy_; _fferylldy_

Le-git-i-ma-cy, _cyfreithlonedd_

Lib-er-al-i-ty, _haelioni_, _haelder_

Ma-gis-te-ri-al, _awdurdodaidd_; _uchelfalch_

Mag-na-nim-i-ty, _mawrfryd_, _mawrfrydigrwydd_

Man-u-fac-to-ry, _gweithfa_; _gwaith_

Ma-te-ri-al-ly, _o lawer_; _yn hanfodol_

Math-e-mat-i-cal, _gwyddonawl_, _arddangosyddol_

Me-di-oc-ri-ty, _canoledd_; _cymmedrolder_

Mer-it-o-ri-ous, _teilwng_; _dybrynawl_

Mis-cel-la-ne-ous, _amrywiol_, _amryfath_

Mod-i-fi-ca-tion, _agweddiad_, _dulliad_

Mon-o-syl-la-ble, _unsillair_, _gair unsill_

Mor-ti-fi-ca-tion, _madreddi_; _siomedigaeth_

Mu-ta-bil-i-ty, _anwadalwch_

Ne-go-ti-a-tion, _negeseuaeth_; _cyflafaredd_

No-to-ri-e-ty, _hynodrwydd_; _erchylldra_

O-bit-u-a-ry, _marwrestr_

Ob-serv-a-to-ry, _tremynfa_, _arsyllfa_

Op-por-tu-ni-ty, _amser_, _cyfleusdra_, _adeg_

Or-gan-i-za-tion, _iawnffurfiad_, _iawnosodiad_

Pa-ci-fi-ca-tion, _heddychiad_; _dyhuddiad_

Par-si-mo-ni-ous, _cynnil_, _arbedus_, _cybyddlyd_

Pe-ri-od-i-cal, _cylchawl_, _cylchynawl_

Per-pen-dic-u-lar, _unionsyth_, _unionseth_

Po-ly-syl-la-ble, _amlsillawg_, _amlsill_

Pre-cip-i-ta-tion, _chwidrfrys_, _tafliad_

Pre-des-ti-na-tion, _rhagdrefniad_

Pre-lim-i-na-ry, _rhagammod_; _rhagsail_; _rhagammodol_; _rhagarweiniol_

Pre-med-i-ta-tion, _cynarfaethiad_

Pre-par-a-to-ry, _darpariadol_

Prin-ci-pal-i-ty, _tywysogaeth_

Prob-a-bil-i-ty, _tebygolrwydd_

Pro-cras-ti-na-tion, _addoediad_, _oediad_

Pro-nun-ci-a-tion, _aceniad_; _traethiad_

Pro-pi-ti-a-tion, _dihuddiant_, _heddychiad_, _cymmod_; _iawn_

Prov-i-den-tial-ly, _yn rhagluniaethol_

Pu-ri-fi-ca-tion, _purad_, _puredigaeth_

Pu-sil-lan-i-mous, _gwangalon_, _llwfr_

Qua-li-fi-ca-tion, _cymhwysder_, _dawn_

Rat-i-fi-ca-tion, _cadarnhâd_, _sicrhâd_

Re-ca-pit-u-late, _ailbenodi_, _ailadrodd_

Rec-om-mend-a-ble, _canmoladwy_

Rec-om-mend-a-tion, _canmoliaeth_; _cymmeradwyaeth_

Rec-on-cil-a-ble, _cymmodadwy_

Re-cov-er-a-ble, _adenilladwy_, _gwelladwy_

Re-crim-i-na-tion, _gwrthgyhuddiad_

Re-gen-er-a-tion, _adgenedliad_, _adenedigaeth_

Reg-u-lar-i-ty, _rheoleiddrwydd_

Re-nun-ci-a-tion, _ymwrthodiad_

Re-pos-i-to-ry, _ystorfa_, _ystordy_, _trysorfa_

Rep-re-sent-a-tion, _arddangosiad_; _cynnyrchioliad_

Rep-re-sent-a-tive, _cynnyrchiolwr_; _dangosedigol_

Re-serv-a-to-ry, _ystordy_

Re-ta-li-a-tion, _atdaliad_, _gwrthbwyth_

Re-ver-ber-a-tion, _gwrthdroad_; _gwrthseiniad_

Sanc-ti-fi-ca-tion, _santeiddiad_; _purdeb_

Sat-is-fac-to-ry, _boddhaol_, _boddlongar_

Sen-si-bil-i-ty, _teimladrwydd_, _tynerwch_

Sen-su-al-i-ty, _cnawdolrwydd_

Sig-ni-fi-ca-tion, _arwyddocâd_, _ystyr_

Sim-i-lar-i-ty, _cyffelybrwydd_

Sim-ul-ta-ne-ous, _cydweithredol_

Sin-gu-lar-i-ty, _neillduolrwydd_, _hynodrwydd_

Sol-em-ni-za-tion, _difrifgadwad_; _gweinyddiad_

So-lic-i-ta-tion, _taerddeisyfiad_

Sti-pen-di-a-ry, _cyflogddyn_

Sub-or-di-na-tion, _israddoliaeth_

Sub-sid-i-a-ry, _cynnorthwyol_

Sub-ter-ra-ne-ous, _tanddaiarawl_

Su-per-a-bun-dance, _arddigonedd_, _gormodedd_

Su-per-a-bun-dant, _gormodawl_

Su-per-an-nu-ate, _oedfreinio_; _gorflwyddiant_

Su-per-flu-i-ty, _gorddigonedd_

Su-per-in-tend-ence, _arolygiad_, _golygiad_

Su-per-in-tend-ent, _arolygwr_, _goruchwyliwr_

Su-per-nat-u-ral, _goruchnaturiol_

Tac-i-turn-i-ty, _dystawrwydd_

Ter-ri-to-ri-al, _tiriogaethol_

Tes-ta-ment-a-ry, _cymmynawl_

Tes-ti-mo-ni-al, _tystlythyr_; _tystiolaethol_

Trans-fig-u-ra-tion, _trawsddulliad_, _gweddnewidiad_

Tran-sub-stan-ti-ate, _trawssylweddu_

Trig-o-nom-e-try, _trionglaeth_

Un-ac-count-a-ble, _annirnadwy_, _dieithr_

U-na-nim-i-ty, _unfrydedd_, _cydsyniad_

Un-com-fort-a-ble, _anghysurus_, _digysur_

Un-con-quer-a-ble, _anorchfygol_

Un-cul-ti-va-ted, _anwrteithiol_; _diddysg_; _heb ei drin_

Un-de-vi-at-ing, _anwyrol_, _anymgrwydrol_

Un-ex-pe-di-ent, _anghyfleus_, _anaddas_

U-ni-form-i-ty, _unffurfiad_, _unweddiad_

Un-ne-ces-sa-ry, _afreidiol_, _diraid_

Un-par-don-a-ble, _anfaddeuadwy_

Un-prof-it-a-ble, _difudd_, _dielw_

Un-rea-son-a-ble, _afresymol_, _direswm_

Un-sea-son-a-ble, _annhymmig_, _anamserol_

Un-sep-a-ra-ble, _anwahanadwy_

Un-suf-fer-a-ble, _anoddefadwy_, _anoddefol_

Va-ri-a-ble-ness, _anwadalwch_, _amrywioldeb_

Ver-i-fi-ca-tion, _gwiriad_, _gwirioneddiad_

Ver-si-fi-ca-tion, _prydyddiaeth_, _mydraeth_

Vet-er-i-na-ry, _milfeddygol_

Vo-cab-u-la-ry, _geirlyfryn_

Vo-cif-e-ra-tion, _crochfloedd_, _banllefiad_

Vo-lun-ta-ri-ly, _yn ewyllysgar_




APPENDIX.

ENGLISH-WELSH DIALOGUES.

ATTODIAD.

CYDYMDDYDDANION SAESNEG A CHYMRAEG.




APPENDIX.



  CONVERSATIONS, &c.                    _YMDDYDDANION, &c._

  Good morning to you.                  _Boreu da i chwi._

  Good morning, sir.                    _Boreu da, syr._

  It is fine weather.                   _Mae hi yn dywydd braf._

  Delightful, after the rain we         _Hyfryd ar ol y gwlaw a gawsom._
    have had.

  Will you come for a walk to           _A ddeuwch chwi i roi tro ir_
    the country?                          _wlad?_

  I will with pleasure.                 _Deuaf gyd a phleser._

  Which way shall we go?                _Pa ffordd yr awn i?_

  Suppose we go along the road,         _Beth ped aem ar hyd y ffordd,_
    and return through the                _a dychwelyd drwy y caeau._
    fields

  Very well; let us start then.         _O'r goreu; gadewch i ni gychwyn_
                                          _ynte!_

  What o'clock is it now?               _Beth yw hi o'r gloch yn awr?_

  Half-past ten.                        _Hanner awr wedi deg._

  We must manage to be back             _Rhaid i ni ymorol bod yn ol_
    by noon.                              _erbyn hanner dydd._

  Then we had better not go             _Gwell ynte i ni beidio myned_
    far.                                  _yn mhell._

  Where does this road lead to?         _I ba le mae y ffordd hon yn_
                                          _arwain?_

  To a village about two miles          _I bentref oddeutu dwy filltir_
    off.                                  _oddi yma._

  The country air is very healthy.      _Y mae awyr y wlad yn bur_
                                          _iachus._

  It is, and does one much good.        _Ydyw, ac yn gwneud lles_
                                          _mawr i un._

  Do you know anything of this          _A wyddoch chwi rywbeth am_
    neighbourhood?                        _y gymmydogaeth hon._

  Yes, a little.                        _Gwn, ychydig._

  Who lives in that mansion?            _Pwy sydd yn byw yn y plas_
                                          _yna?_

  An independent gentleman.             _Gwr boneddig yn byw ar ei_
                                          _arian._

  He is a man of property, I            _Y mae yn wr o gyfoeth feddyliwn_
    presume.

  He is; and most of the farmers        _Ydyw; ái dyddynwyr ef ydyw_
    about here are his tenants.           _y rhan fwyaf ó'r ffermwyr_
                                          _oddeutu yma._

  Another pretty residence; who         _Dyma dŷ hardd arall; pwy_
    lives here?                           _sydd yn byw yma?_

  The clergyman of the parish;          _Offeiriad y plwyf; gwr parchus,_
    an esteemed man, and a                _a chyfaill da ir tlawd._
    good friend to the poor.

  I begin to feel the heat of the       _Yr wyf yn dechreu teimlo_
    sun.                                  _gwres yr haul._

  It does get warm: but we              _Y mae hi yn gwresogi; ond_
    shall have a fine shade presently.    _ni a gawn gysgod hyfryd yn_
                                          _fuan._

  What is it I see beyond the           _Beth wyf yn weled tu draw ír_
    bridge yonder?                        _bont acw?_

  The wind-mill.                        _Y felin wynt._

  I see the spire of a church; I        _Yr wyf yn gweled clochdy eglwys,_
    suppose this is the village.          _hwn yw y pentref debygwn._

  It is; and the building on the        _Ië; ár adeilad ár yr ochr_
    left is the school-house.             _aswy yw yr ysgoldy._

  Is the church-yard worth visiting?    _A ydyw y fynwent yn werth_
                                          _ymweled a hi?_

  Yes; but we cannot stop.              _Ydyw, ond nis gallwn aros._

  Must we go over that hill on          _A raid i ni fyned dros y bryn_
    our return?                           _yna ár ein dychweliad?_

  No; we can take the fields            _Na raid; gallwn gymmeryd y_
    along the river side.                 _caeau efo ochr yr afon._

  Is there a footpath that way?         _A oes llwybr troed y ffordd_
                                          _hono?_

  There is, and a very pleasant         _Oes, ac un hyfryd iawn hefyd._
    one too.

  Do we go over this stile?             _A ydym yn myned dros y_
                                          _gamfa yma?_

  To save that trouble the gate         _I arbed y drafferth hono, gellir_
    can be opened.                        _agor y llidiart._

  What a fine crop of hay there         _Y fath gnwd da o wair sydd_
    is in this meadow.                    _yn y weirglodd yma._

  Capital; and very soon it will        _Rhagorol; ac, yn bur fuan,_
    be ready for cutting.                 _bydd yn barod íw dorí._

  What grows in the field adjoining?    _Beth sydd yn tyfu yn y cae_
                                          _nesaf?_

  Wheat, I should think.                _Gwenith, mi feddyliwn._

  Is it not barley?                     _Ai nid haidd ydyw?_

  No; but there is a part of it         _Nage; ond y mae rhan o hono_
    oats.                                 _yn geirch._

  Is that a potatoe field beyond        _Ai cae cloron yw hwna, tu_
    it?                                   _draw iddo?_

  Yes, and a part of it set for         _Ië, a rhan o hono wedi ei osod_
    turnips.                              _i faip._

  Are much beans and peas               _A godir llawer o ffa a phys_
    raised about here?                    _oddeutu yma?_

  Yes, and cabbage too.                 _Gwneir, a bresych hefyd._

  We must walk quicker, or we           _Rhaid i ni gerdded yn gyflymach,_
    shall have a shower.                  _onide ni a gawn gawod._

  Did you hear the thunder last         _A glywsoch chwi y taranau_
    night?                                _neithiwr?_

  I did not, but fancied I saw          _Naddo; ond tybiais i mi weled_
    lightning.                            _mellt._

  It hailed about midnight.             _Yr oedd yn bwrw cenllysg tua_
                                          _hanner nos._

  A few days ago there was              _Ychydig ddyddiau yn ol yr_
    snow upon the mountains.              _oedd eira ar y mynyddoedd._

  So I have heard, and that it          _Felly y clywais, ai bod hi yn_
    was freezing hard at night.           _rhewi yn galed y nos._

  Well, we are back by the time         _Wel, dyma ni yn ol erbyn yr_
    we said.                              _amser y dywedasom._

  Yes, to the minute.                   _Ië, í'r fynud._

  When shall we go again?               _Pa bryd y cawn i fyned eto?_

  Any day next week, except             _Rhyw ddiwrnod yr wythnos_
    Tuesday.                              _nesaf oddi eithr Dydd_
                                          _Mawrth._

  Let me know on Monday                 _Gadewch i mi wybod nos Llun_
    evening, if you please.               _os gwelwch yn dda?_

  I will, if possible.                  _Os yn alluadwy, mi wnaf._

  This is my nearest way; so            _Dyma 'r ffordd agosaf i mi;_
    good bye for the present.             _felly da y bo chwi yn awr._

  Good bye, sir, and thank you          _Da y bo chwi, syr, a diolch i_
    for your company.                     _chwi am eich cwmni._




  MEAT AND DRINK, &c.                   _BWYD A DIOD, &c._

  I want my breakfast.                  _Mae arnaf eisiau fy moreufwyd._

  What would you like to have,          _Beth a ewyllysiech ei gael, syr?_
    sir?

  Make me a cup of tea.                 _Gwnewch i mi gwpaned o De._

  I am not fond of coffee.              _Nid wyf yn hoff o goffi._

  I like coffee better than tea.        _Gwell genyf i goffi, na the._

  Coffee does not agree with me.        _Nid yw coffi yn dygymmod a_
                                          _mi._

  Fetch a pound of sugar.               _Ewch i nol pwys o siwgr._

  Where from?                           _O ba le?_

  From the corner shop.                 _O siop y gongl._

  Have you any cream?                   _A oes genych hufen?_

  No; but I have some new               _Nac oes, ond mae genyf laeth_
    milk.                                 _newydd ei odro._

  Cut some bread and butter.            _Torwch fara ac ymenyn._

  Will you have some toasted            _A fynwch chwi fara wedi ei_
    bread?                                _grasu?_

  Yes, and a little cheese.             _Cymeraf, ac ychdig o gaws._

  Are there any cakes sold here?        _A oes teisenau ár werth yma?_

  Yes, but I never buy any.             _Oes, ond nid wyf byth yn prynu_
                                          _rhai._

  Are you fond of oat-meal              _A ydych yn hoff o fara ceirch?_
    cakes?

  I am.                                 _Ydwyf._

  But wheaten bread is the best.        _Ond bara gwenith ydyw 'r_
                                          _goreu._

  Some prefer rye bread.                _Mae 'n well gan rai fara rhyg._

  It does not agree with me.            _Nid ydyw yn dygymmod a mi._

  Nor with me.                          _Na chyda minnau._

  Is it dinner time?                    _A ydyw yn amser ciniaw?_

  Yes, this half hour.                  _Ydyw er's hanner awr._

  I thought so.                         _Yr oeddwn yn meddwl hyny._

  Is dinner ready?                      _A ydyw y ciniaw yn barod?_

  Yes, sir, it is.                      _Ydyw, syr, y mae._

  I feel very hungry; do you?           _Yr wyf yn teimlo yn dra newynog,_
                                          _a ydych chwi?_

  No, sir, I have no appetite.          _Nac ydwyf, nid oes arnaf_
                                          _chwant bwyd._

  What is the cause of it?              _Beth ydyw yr achos o hyny?_

  I do not know, sir.                   _Nid wyf yn gwybod, syr._

  What is for dinner to-day?            _Beth sydd i giniaw heddyw?_

  There is roasted meat.                _Mae yma gig rhost._

  Is it beef?                           _Ai cig eidion ydyw?_

  No; it is veal.                       _Nage; cig llo ydyw._

  Is it the loin?                       _Ai y lwyn ydyw?_

  No; it is the shoulder.               _Nage; yr ysbawd ydyw._

  There is also a loin of mutton.       _Mae yma hefyd lwyn o gig_
                                          _mollt._

  Is it roasted or boiled?              _Pa un ai rhostedig ai berwedig?_

  Roasted, sir.                         _Rhostedig, syr._

  I thought you had some lamb.          _Tybiais fod genych gig oen._

  No, I failed to go to market in       _Nag oes, methais a myned ir_
    time.                                 _farchnad mewn pryd._

  Have you any boiled meat?             _A oes genych gig berw?_

  There is a leg of veal.               _Mae yma goes o gig llo._

  Bring the bacon here.                 _Deuwch á'r cig moch yma._

  Who is fond of venison?               _Pwy sydd yn hoff o hydd-gig?_

  I am very fond of it.                 _Yr wyf i yn bur hoff o hono._

  May I cut some for you?               _A gaf fi dori peth i chwi?_

  A little, if you please.              _Ychydig os gwelwch yn dda._

  Have you any fowls?                   _A oes genych ddim adar?_

  Yes, I have a brace of partridges.    _Oes, mae genyf gwpl o betris._

  Is that a pigeon pie?                 _Ai pastai golomenod yw hona?_

  No; it is an eel pie.                 _Nage, pastai llyswod ydyw._

  Perhaps you would have preferred      _Feallai y buasech yn dewis yr_
    the duck.                             _hwyaden._

  I am very fond of duck and            _Yr wyf yn bur hoff o hwyaden_
    green peas.                           _a phys gleision._

  I am glad to hear; for there          _Mae yn dda genyf glywed,_
    are plenty of them to-day.            _oblegid y mae yma ddigonedd_
                                          _heddyw._

  Will you take turnips or carrots?     _A gymmerwch chwi faip neu_
                                          _foron?_

  Not any, thank you, I am satisfied.   _Dim, diolchi chwi, yr ydwyf_
                                          _wedi fy nigoni._

  Bring the cheese on the table.        _Deuwch ar caws ar y bwrdd._

  May I cut you some?                   _A gaf i dori peth i chwi?_

  A small piece, if you please.         _Ychydig os gwelwch yn dda._

  What will you drink?                  _Beth a wnewch chwi ei yfed?_

  A glass of water.                     _Gwydriad o ddwfr._

  Draw a quart of ale.                  _Gollyngwch chwart o gwrw._

  This is too sweet.                    _Mae hwn yn rhy felys._

  Draw a pint from the other            _Gollyngwch beint o'r faril_
    barrel.                               _arall._

  This is too bitter.                   _Mae hwn yn rhy chwerw._

  Mix them together.                    _Cymmysgwch hwy ynghyd._

  It is much better now.                _Y mae yn llawer gwell yn awr._

  Yes, sir, it is.                      _Ydyw, syr, y mae._

  When was this brewed?                 _Pa bryd y darllawyd hwn?_

  Last October.                         _Yn Hydref diweddaf._

  Old ale does not agree with           _Nid ydyw hen gwrw yn dygymmod_
    me.                                   _a mi._

  But fresh ale does.                   _Ond y mae cwrw newydd._

  I prefer old ale.                     _Mae yn well genyf i hen gwrw._

  Take a glass of wine with me.         _Cymmerwch wydriad o win_
                                          _gyd a mi._

  Which? port or sherry?                _Pa un? ai gwin coch, ai gwin_
                                          _gwyn?_

  Whichever you please to take.         _Yr un a weloch chwi yn dda_
                                          _iw gymmeryd._

  Allow me to give you another          _Gadewch i mi roddi i chwi_
    glass.                                _wydriad arall._

  Not any more, thank you.              _Dim yn rhagor, diolch i chwi._

  Let us now walk in the garden.        _Gadewch i ni yn awr, rodio_
                                          _yn yr ardd._

  What is the size of your garden?      _Beth ydyw maint eich gardd?_

  It is nearly two acres.               _Mae yn agos i ddwy erw._

  Is it a fruitful garden?              _A ydyw yn ardd ffrwythlawn?_

  The best in this part of the          _Yr oreu yn y rhan yma ó'r_
    country.                              _wlad._

  Have you many trees in it?            _A oes genych lawer o goed_
                                          _ynddi?_

  Yes, a great many apple trees.        _Oes, lawer o goed afalau._

  What would you like to have           _Beth a ddymunech gael i_
    for supper?                           _swper?_

  Bread and cheese.                     _Bara a chaws._

  Doctors do not recommend              _Nid ydyw meddygon yn cymmeradwyo_
    much supper.                          _llawer o swper._

  Take some cold meat.                  _Cymmerwch gig oer._

  Not any, thank you.                   _Dim diolch i chwi._

  What will you drink?                  _Pa beth a yfwch chwi?_

  A glass of small beer.                _Gwydriad o ddiod fain._

  Take a glass of brandy.               _Gymmerwch wydriad o frandi._

  I do not drink spirits.               _Nid wyf yn yfed gwirod._

  Will you dine with me to-morrow?      _A giniawch chwi gyd a mi y_
                                          _fory?_

  I am sorry to say, I cannot.          _Mae yn ddrwg genyf ddweud_
                                          _nas gallaf._

  Why? what is the cause?               _Paham? beth ydyw yr achos?_

  I must go to Shrewsbury to-morrow     _Rhaid i mi fyned ir Amwythig_
    to meet my brother.                   _y fory i gyfarfod fy mrawd._

  Is he coming home?                    _A ydyw ef yn dyfod adre._

  Yes, for a short time.                _Ydyw am yehydig amser._

  It is time to go to rest.             _Mae hi yn bryd myned i orphwys._

  It is, I am getting sleepy.           _Ydyw y mae, yr wyf yn myned_
                                          _yn gysglyd._

  Good night, sir.                      _Nos da i chwi, syr._




  SALUTATIONS, &c.                      _CYFARCHIADAU, &c._

  Good afternoon, sir.                  _Prydnhawn da, syr._

  How are you to-day?                   _Sut yr ydych chwi heddyw?_

  I am very well, thank you.            _Yr wyf yn bur iach, diolch i_
                                          _chwi._

  How are the wife and children?        _Pa fodd mae 'r wraig a 'r_
                                          _plant?_

  They are all very well.               _Maent oll yn bur iach._

  Is your family well?                  _A ydyw eich teulu chwi yn_
                                          _iach?_

  They are all well except the          _Maent oll yn iach, oddi eithr_
    youngest child?                       _y plentyn ieuengaf._

  What ails him?                        _Beth sydd yn ei flino._

  The measles.                          _Y frech goch._

  How is your mother?                   _Sut y mae eich mam?_

  She is pretty well considering        _Mae hi yn lled dda, ac ystyried_
    her age.                              _ei hoed._

  How old is she?                       _Pa mor hen yw hi?_

  She is eighty since Christmas.        _Mae hi yn bedwar ugain er_
                                          _Nadolig._

  Is your father still living?          _A ydyw eich tad yn fyw eto?_

  No, he died last March.               _Nag ydyw, bu farw yn mis_
                                          _Mawrth diweddaf._

  Was he long ill?                      _A fu efe yn hir yn sal?_

  Yes, about two years.                 _Do, oddeutu dwy flynedd._

  You have had a great loss.            _Chwi a gawsoch golled fawr._

  Yes; but mother has had a             _Do, ond fy mam a gafodd fwy_
    greater loss.                         _o golled._

  Where was your father buried?         _Yn mha le y claddwyd eich_
                                          _tad?_

  He was buried at Wrexham.             _Claddwyd ef yn Ngwrecsam._

  What was his age?                     _Beth oed ei oedran?_

  Ninety.                               _Pedwar ugain a deg._

  He was very old.                      _Yr oedd yn bur hen._

  How are you this morning,             _Sut yr ydych chwi heddyw_
    sir?                                  _boreu, syr?_

  I am not well; neither have I         _Nid wyf yn iach, ac nid wyf_
    been well some time.                  _wedi bod yn iach er's peth_
                                          _amser._

  I am sorry to hear that.              _Mae'n ddrwg genyf glywed_
                                          _hyny._

  Where is your pain?                   _Yn mha le mae eich poen?_

  In my head.                           _Yn fy mhen._

  Have you been with a medical          _A fuoch chwi gyd a meddyg?_
    man?

  Yes; but the medicine does            _Do, ond nid ydyw y cyffyriau_
    me no good.                           _yn gwneuthwr daioni i mi._

  Perhaps the doctor does not           _Feallai nad ydyw y meddyg_
    understand your complaint.            _yn deall eich afiechyd._

  Perhaps so.                           _Feallai hyny._

  You had better try another.           _Gwell fyddai i chwi dreio un_
                                          _arall._

  I intend to do so next week.          _Bwriadwyf wneud felly yr_
                                          _wythnos nesaf._

  Where are you going to-day?           _I ba le yr ydych yn myned_
                                          _heddyw?_

  I am going to Holyhead.               _Yr wyf yn myned i Gaergybi._

  Will you go with me?                  _A ewch chwi gyd a mi?_

  Yes, if you will stop until four      _Deuaf, os arhoswch tan bedwar_
    o'clock.                              _o'r gloch._

  Can't you go sooner?                  _Oni ellwch chwi fyned yn_
                                          _gynt?_

  No; I want to see my sister.          _Na allaf, mae arnaf eisiau_
                                          _gweled fy chwaer._

  Very well, call at the Harp           _Or goreu, gelwch yn Ngwesty'r_
    Inn.                                  _Delyn._

  Where were you yesterday?             _Pa le yr oeddych chwi ddoe?_

  At Chester.                           _Yn Nghaer._

  What news from there?                 _Pa newydd oddi yno?_

  Nothing at all of importance.         _Dim yn y byd o bwys._

  Did you see my brother there?         _A welsoch chwi fy mrawd yno?_

  Yes, I saw him at a distance;         _Do, gwelais ef o bell; yr oedd_
    he was very busy.                     _yn bur brysur._

  I expect him home next                _Yr wyf yn ei ddysgwil adre yr_
    week.                                 _wythnos nesaf._

  Not to stay at home.                  _Nid i aros gartref._

  No, only for a fortnight.             _Nage, dim ond am bythefnos._

  Is he in a good situation?            _A ydyw ef mewn sefyllfa dda?_

  Yes, a very good one.                 _Ydyw, un dda iawn._

  Have you much to do at Holyhead       _A oes genych lawer i wneud_
    this afternoon?                       _yn Nghaergybi heddyw_
                                          _prydnhawn?_

  No, but little.                       _Nac oes, ond ychydig._

  Have you finished, sir?               _A orphenasoch chwi, syr?_

  Yes; but we must have a               _Do, ond rhaid i ni gael gwydriad_
    glass or two of ale.                  _neu ddau o gwrw._

  Where shall we go to get it?          _I ba le yr awn iw geisio?_

  To the King's Head.                   _I ben y Brenin._

  What sort of people are they?         _Pa fath bobl ydynt?_

  They are very kind people.            _Maent yn bobl garedig iawn._

  Who is that person, going by?         _Pwy yw y person yna sy'n_
                                          _myned heibio?_

  I do not know him.                    _Nid wyf yn ei adnabod ef._

  I am now for going home.              _Yr wyf yn awr am fyned adre._

  It is time for us to go.              _Mae yn amser i ni fyned._

  Yes, it is.                           _Ydyw y mae._

  Thank you for your company.           _Diolch i chwi am eich cwmni._

  You are welcome; don't mention        _Mae i chwi groesaw, tewch a_
    it.                                   _son._

  My compliments to your                _Fy moesau at eich brawd._
    brother.

  Good bye, sir.                        _Da y bo chwi, syr._




  EMPLOYMENTS, &c.                      _GORUCHWYLION, &c._

  What is your occupation?              _Beth yw eich galwedigaeth_
                                          _chwi?_

  I was brought up an attorney.         _Fe'm dygwyd i fynu yn wr_
                                          _y gyfraith._

  Where is your office?                 _Pa le mae eich swyddfa?_

  In Castle Street.                     _Yn Heol y Castell._

  When will the assize be?              _Pa bryd y bydd y Frawdlys?_

  Between Epiphany and Easter.          _Rhwng yr Ystwyll a'r Pasc._

  Do you get enough of employment?      _A ydych chwi yn cael digon_
                                          _o waith?_

  Yes, and I have three apprentices.    _Ydwyf, ac y mae genyf dri o_
                                          _egwyddor weision._

  I am glad to hear.                    _Mae'n dda genyf glywed._

  What is your father's calling?        _Beth ydyw galwedigaeth eich_
                                          _tad?_

  He is an engineer.                    _Peirianwr yw efe._

  How old is he now?                    _Beth ydyw ei oed yn awr?_

  He is about fifty.                    _Y mae oddeutu deg a deugain._

  Have you any brothers?                _A oes genych chwi frodyr?_

  Yes, I have six.                      _Oes, mae genyf chwech._

  What are they doing?                  _Pa beth maent hwy yn ei_
                                          _wneuthur?_

  They are all with my father,          _Maent oll gyda fy nhad oddi_
    except one.                           _eithr un._

  What is he doing?                     _Pa beth mae e yn ei wneud?_

  He is with my uncle, farming.         _Mae gyd a fy ewythr, yn_
                                          _amaethu._

  What was your grandfather's           _Beth oedd galwedigaeth eich_
    occupation?                           _taid?_

  He was a clergyman.                   _Yr oedd yn offeiriad._

  Who is that gentleman?                _Pwy yw'r boneddwr yna?_

  The village doctor.                   _Meddyg y pentref._

  Is there much sickness in this        _A oes llawer o afiechyd yn y_
    neighbourhood now?                    _gymmydogaeth yma yn awr?_

  No, sir, but very little.             _Nac oes, syr, ond ychydig_
                                          _iawn._

  Where is the doctor going?            _Pa le mae'r meddyg yn myned?_

  To visit the sick.                    _I ymweled a'r cleifion._

  Who is at the door?                   _Pwy sydd wrth y drws?_

  He is a commercial man.               _Masnachwr yw efe._

  Where from?                           _O ba le?_

  From Cardiff.                         _O Gaerdydd._

  Has he a son a woollen-draper?        _A oes ganddo fab yn frethynwr?_

  Yes, and one a linen-draper.          _Oes, ac un yn lieiniwr._

  Where at?                             _Yn mha le?_

  Somewhere near London.                _Yn rhyw le yn agos i Lundain._

  Of what trade is your brother         _Beth ydyw creft eich brawd_
    Thomas?                               _Thomas?_

  He is a stonemason.                   _Saer maen yw efe._

  What trade does David follow?         _Pa gelfyddyd mae Dafydd yn_
                                          _ei ddilyn?_

  He is a weaver.                       _Gwehydd yw efe._

  And what is William?                  _A pheth yw Gwilym?_

  He is a shoemaker.                    _Crydd yw efe._

  His uncle was a tailor.               _Yr oedd ei ewythr yn deiliwr._

  What is your employment?              _Beth ydyw eich gwaith chwi?_

  I am a farmer.                        _Amaethwr ydwyf fi._

  How large is your farm?               _Pa mor fawr ydyw eich tyddyn?_

  Six score acres.                      _Chwech ugain cyfar._

  How many cows do you                  _Pa nifer o fuchod a gedwch?_
    keep?

  Fifteen generally.                    _Pymtheg yn gyffredin._

  How many horses?                      _Faint o geffylau?_

  Three, and a young colt.              _Tri ac ebol ieuangc._

  And what number of sheep?             _A pha nifer o ddefaid?_

  About thirty.                         _Oddeutu deg a'r hugain._

  What sort of land is your             _Pa fath dir yw eich tyddyn?_
    farm?

  A part of it is meadow land.          _Mae rhan o hono yn weirglodd-dir._

  And part of it is pasture.            _Ac y mae rhan o hono yn borfa._

  And another part is woodland.         _A rhan arall yn goedtir._

  But the greatest part is arable.      _Ond y mae y rhan fwyaf yn_
                                          _aradwy._

  Have you done ploughing?              _A ddarfu chwi aredig?_

  Yes, the men are harrowing.           _Do, mae'r dynion yn llyfnu._

  Have you done sowing wheat?           _A ddarfu chwi hau gwenith?_

  Yes, and have finished harrowing.     _Do, ac wedi gorphen llyfnu._

  Harvest will be early this            _Bydd yn gynhauaf cynar_
    year.                                 _eleni._

  Yes, it will; for the wheat is        _Bydd, mae'r gwenith yn agos_
    nearly ripe now.                      _yn addfed yn awr._

  Have you commenced reaping?           _A ddarfu chwi ddechreu medi?_

  Yes, I have three men reaping         _Do, mae genyf dri o ddynion_
    to-day.                               _yn medi heddyw._

  Do you intend to reap the             _A ydych yn bwriadu medi'r_
    barley and oats?                      _haidd a'r ceirch?_

  No, I intend cutting them             _Na, yr wyf yn meddwl eu tori_
    with a scythe.                        _a'r bladur._

  Have you had your harvest?            _A gawsoch chwi y cynhauaf?_

  Yes, except the oats.                 _Do, oddi eithr y ceirch._

  Have you had yours?                   _A gawsoch chwi yr eiddoch?_

  Yes, a week ago.                      _Do, er's wythnos._

  My servant is thrashing barley.       _Mae fy ngwas yn dyrnu haidd._

  How much do you get for the           _Faint ydych yn ei gael am yr_
    barley?                               _haidd?_

  Two pounds a quarter.                 _Dwy bunt y peg._

  I am going to winnow oats to-morrow.  _Yr wyf yn myned i nithio_
                                          _ceirch y fory._

  What do you get for the oats?         _Beth ydych yn ei gael am y_
                                          _ceirch?_

  Twenty-two shillings.                 _Dau swllt a'r hugain._

  What is the price of the wheat        _Beth ydyw pris y gwenith yn_
    in this neighbourhood?                _y gymmydogaeth hon?_

  Three pounds ten.                     _Tair a chweigen._

  Thomas, go and dig potatoes           _Thomas, ewch i godi cloron i_
    for dinner.                           _giniaw._

  What potatoes am I to dig up          _Pa gloron sydd i mi godi_
    to-day?                               _heddyw?_

  The white potatoes.                   _Y cloron gwynion._

  Must I bring turnips and carrots?     _A raid i mi ddwyn maip a_
                                          _moron?_

  Yes, bring a few.                     _Deuwch, ac ychydig._

  Turn the pigs to their sties.         _Trowch y moch iw citiau._

  What for?                             _I ba beth._

  That they may eat the swedes.         _Fel y gallont fwyta y_
                                          _Rhwdins._

  I have done.                          _Yr ydwyf wedi gwneud._

  Gather the sheep into the fold.       _Heliwch y defaid i'r gorlan._

  I want to mark some of them.          _Mae arnaf eisiau nodi rhai o_
                                          _honynt._

  Have you shorn the lambs?             _A ddarfu chwi gneifio yr_
                                          _wyn?_

  No, but will next week.               _Na ddo, ond mi wnaf yr wythnos_
                                          _nesaf._

  It is time to tie the cattle.         _Mae hi yn bryd rhwymo 'r_
                                          _gwartheg._

  I will immediately.                   _Mi a wnaf yn ebrwydd._




  TRAVELLING, &c.                       _YMDAITH, &c._

  Are you going from home?              _A ydych chwi yn myned oddi_
                                          _cartref?_

  I am going to make a long             _Yr wyf yn myned i daith bell._
    journey.

  When will you start?                  _Pa bryd y cychwynwch?_

  In the beginning of July.             _Ddechreu mis Gorphenaf._

  How will you travel?                  _Pa fodd yr ymdeithiwch._

  I will go on horseback to             _Mi âf ar geffyl i Fangor._
    Bangor.

  How will you proceed?                 _Pa fodd yr ewch rhagoch?_

  I will take the coach to Holyhead.    _Mi a gymmeraf y cerbyd i_
                                          _Gaergybi._

  Are there commodious inns in          _A oes Gwestfäoedd cysurus_
    Wales?                                _yn Nghymru?_

  There are but a few.                  _Nid oes ond ychydig._

  Are there good stables?               _A oes stablau da yno?_

  Yes, pretty fair.                     _Oes, lled dda._

  Where is the hostler?                 _Pa le mae'r ostler?_

  He is coming, sir.                    _Mae efe yn dyfod, syr._

  Take care of my horse.                _Cymmerwch ofal o fy ngheffyl._

  Clean him well.                       _Glanhewch ef yn dda._

  I will, sir.                          _Mi wnaf, syr._

  Have you good hay?                    _A oes genych wair da?_

  Yes, sir, the best in the country.    _Oes, syr, y goreu yn y wlad._

  Give him a feed of oats.              _Rhoddwch iddo ddogn o geirch._

  Spread clean straw under him.         _Taenwch wellt glân o dano._

  Where is the waiter?                  _Pa le y mae'r gweitiwr?_

  I am here, sir.                       _Yr wyf yma, syr._

  Take my trunk to the bedroom.         _Cymmerwch fy nhrwngc i'r_
                                          _ystafell wely._

  Lend me a candle.                     _Rhowch fenthyg canwyll._

  Warm the bed.                         _Twymnwch y gwely._

  I hope the bed is not damp.           _Gobeithio nad yw y gwely yn_
                                          _llaith._

  No, sir, somebody is in it            _Nac ydyw, mae rhyw un ynddo_
    every night.                          _bob nos._

  Bring another blanket.                _Deuwch a gwrthban arall._

  Is one enough?                        _A ydyw un yn ddigon?_

  Yes, perhaps I shall not want         _Ydyw, feallai na bydd arnaf_
    one.                                  _eisiau un._

  Where is the night cap?               _Pa le mae y cap nos?_

  Bring some water into the             _Deuwch a dwfr i'r ystafell._
    room.

  Have you a towel there?               _A oes genych dywel yna?_

  Yes, sir, I have two clean            _Oes, syr, mae genyf ddau_
    ones.                                 _lân._

  When do you intend to get             _Pa bryd y bwriedwch godi?_
    up?

  About six o'clock.                    _Oddeutu chwech o'r gloch._

  Get my breakfast ready by             _Parattowch fy moreufwyd_
    seven o'clock.                        _erbyn saith o'r gloch._

  What time will the coach              _Pa bryd y cychwyna y cerbyd?_
    leave?

  It leaves at ten o'clock.             _Mae'n cychwyn ddeg o'r gloch._

  How many miles are there to           _Pa sawl milltir sydd i'r dref_
    the next town?                        _nesaf?_

  You have fifteen miles.               _Mae i chwi bymtheg milltir._

  What sort of road is it?              _Pa fath ffordd ydyw?_

  A very uneven road.                   _Ffordd bur anwastad._

  You must go over the mountain.        _Rhaid i chwi fyned dros y_
                                          _mynydd._

  Are there many cross roads?           _A oes llawer o groes ffyrdd?_

  Only one, to the left.                _Dim ond un, ar yr aswy._

  Is there a river on the road?         _A oes afon ar y ffordd?_

  Yes, about four miles off.            _Oes oddeutu pedair milltir_
                                          _ym mlaen._

  How shall we cross over?              _Pa fodd y croeswn drosodd?_

  There is an excellent bridge.         _Mae yno bont ragorol._

  How many miles more have I?           _Pa sawl milltir eto sydd_
                                          _genyf?_

  You will soon come to your            _Chwi a ddeuwch yn fuan i ben_
    journey's end.                        _eich taith._

  Whose house is that yonder?           _Tŷ pwy yw hwn acw?_

  It is the Bishop's palace.            _Plas yr Esgob yw._

  Where is the church?                  _Yn mha le mae'r Eglwys?_

  At the foot of yonder hill.           _Wrth droed y bryn acw._

  Where shall we alight?                _Yn mha le y disgynwn?_

  At the Castle Inn.                    _Yn Ngwesty y Castell._

  Which is the travellers' room?        _Pa un yw ystafell ymdeithwyr?_

  It is on the right hand.              _Mae hi ar y llaw ddehau._

  Is there a waterfall in this          _A oes rhaiadr yn y gymmydogaeth_
    neighbourhood?                        _hon?_

  Yes; it is six miles from here.       _Oes, y mae chwe milltir oddi_
                                          _yma._

  I have a wish to see it.              _Mae genyf ewyllys iw weled._

  Can I have a guide?                   _A allaf fi gael arweinydd?_

  Yes, sir, there is one ready at       _Gellwch, syr, mae un yn barod_
    hand.                                 _wrth law._

  I will hire a pony.                   _Mi a logaf ferlyn._

  It will cost you seven shillings.     _Mi gostia i chwi saith swllt._

  Very well, here they are.             _O'r goreu, dyma nhw._

  Saddle him immediately.               _Cyfrwywch ef yn union._

  Which is the nearest road?            _Pa un yw y ffordd nesaf?_

  Across the hill.                      _Ar draws y bryn._

  Then, turn to your left.              _Wedi, hyny, trowch ar eich llaw
      aswy._

  Follow the brink of the river.        _Canlynwch lan yr afon._

  For how far?                          _Am ba mor bell._

  For a mile and a half.                _Am filltir a hanner._

  There is a beautiful prospect         _Mae yma olygfa hardd._
    here.

  Astonishing, what a variety!          _Rhyfedd, y fath amrywiaeth!_

  It is going to rain.                  _Mae hi yn myned i wlawio._

  We must make haste.                   _Mae yn rhaid i ni frysio._

  We shall be caught in the rain.       _Fe oddiwedda y gwlaw nyni._

  Will your horse trot?                 _A wna eich ceffyl duthio?_

  He will canter famously.              _Efe a garlama yn rhagorol._

  We shall not be long.                 _Ni byddwn yn hir._

  About half an hour.                   _Oddeutu hanner awr._

  That is a good pony.                  _Merlyn da yw hwna._

  Not so good, as the one I had         _Nid cystal, a'r hwn oedd genyf_
    yesterday.                            _ddoe._

  Take off your top coat.               _Tynwch eich côb._

  I am wet to the skin.                 _Yr wyf yn wlyb hyd y croen._

  And I am too.                         _A minnau hefyd._

  Put my clothes to dry.                _Rhowch fy nillad i sychu._

  I wish to see the monastery.          _Dymunwn weled y fynachlog._

  Which is the road to the old          _Pa un yw'r ffordd at yr hen_
    monastery?                            _fynachlog?_

  Go straight forward.                  _Ewch rhag eich blaen._

  Keep to the right hand.               _Cedwch ar y llaw ddehau._

  Make towards the grove yonder.        _Cyfeiriwch at y llwyn coed_
                                          _acw._

  Keep that white wall in view.         _Cedwch y wal wen acw mewn_
                                          _golwg._

  There is no finger post.              _Nid oes yna yr un mynegbost._

  Turn by the third milestone.          _Trowch wrth y drydedd gareg_
                                          _filltir._

  I shall be back in two hours.         _Mi a ddeuaf yn ol yn mhen dwy
      awr._

  I must be at home to-morrow           _Rhaid i mi fod gartref nos y
      fory._
    night.

  A horse will meet me at Conway.       _Fe ddaw ceffyl im cyfarfodd i
      Gonway._

  I shall reach home before midnight.   _Mi a gyrhaeddaf adre cyn_
                                          _hanner nos._

  I wish you a pleasant journey.        _Dymunaf i chwi siwrna gyssurus._

  Thank you, sir, for your kindness.    _Diolch i chwi, syr, am eich
      caredigrwydd._

  Make haste this way again.            _Brysiwch y ffordd yma eto._

  Perhaps I may come next year,         _Feallai y deuaf y flwyddyn nesaf,_
    but no sooner.                        _ond nid yn gynt._

  Remember me to Mrs. Jones             _Cofiwch fi at Mrs. Jones a'r_
    and all the family.                   _holl deulu._




  MARKETING, &c.                        _MARCHNADAETH, &c._

  I want to go to market.               _Mae arnaf eisiau myned ir_
                                          _farchnad._

  I have been.                          _Yr ydwyf fi wedi bod._

  Bring me a basket.                    _Moeswch i mi fasged._

  It is ready on the table.             _Mae'n barod ar y bwrdd._

  What will you buy?                    _Pa beth a brynwch?_

  I want to buy several things.         _Mae arnaf eisiau prynu amryw_
                                          _bethau._

  How much a pound is this              _Pa faint y pwys yw y cig eidion_
    beef?                                 _yma?_

  Five pence halfpenny.                 _Pum ceiniog a dimai._

  What will this piece weigh?           _Pa faint a bwysa y darn_
                                          _yma?_

  Fourteen pounds.                      _Pedwar pwys a'r ddeg._

  How much will that come to            _I ba faint y daw hyny wrth_
    at five pence?                        _bum ceiniog?_

  Five shillings and ten pence.         _Pum swllt a deg ceiniog._

  What a pound is the mutton?           _Pa faint y pwys yw'r manllwyn?_

  Six pence halfpenny.                  _Chwech a dimai._

  How much will that loin               _Faint a bwysa y lwyn yna?_
    weigh?

  Nine pounds and a quarter.            _Naw pwys a chwarter._

  Have you any veal?                    _A oes genych gig llo?_

  No, it is all sold.                   _Nac oes, y mae i gyd wedi ei_
                                          _werthu._

  What is the price of this             _Beth ydyw pris yr wydd yma?_
    goose?

  Three and sixpence.                   _Tri a chwech._

  How much do you ask for the           _Faint ydych yn ei ofyn am yr_
    ducks?                                _hwyaid?_

  You shall have the two for            _Chwi a gewch y ddwy am hanner_
    half a crown.                         _coron._

  What a pound is the butter?           _Faint y pwys yw'r menyn?_

  Fourteen pence.                       _Pedair a'r ddeg._

  How many eggs are there for           _Faint o wyau sydd am swllt?_
    a shilling?

  Eighteen.                             _Deunaw._

  I want a measure of potatoes.         _Mae arnaf eisiau mesur o gloron._

  What sort?                            _Pa fath?_

  The best you have.                    _Y rhai goreu sydd genych._

  Please come to the shop.              _Os gwelwch yn dda deuwch i'r_
                                          _siop._

  Let me see your blue cloth.           _Gadewch i mi weled eich brethyn_
                                          _glas._

  How much a yard is it?                _Faint y llath ydyw?_

  Nine and sixpence.                    _Naw a chwech._

  Cut me a yard and a half.             _Torwch i mi lathen a hanner._

  Have you any fine linen?              _A oes genych liain main?_

  Yes, plenty.                          _Oes ddigon._

  I want a pair of woollen stockings.   _Mae arnaf eisiau par o hosanau_
                                          _gwlan._

  What is the price of them?            _Beth ydyw eu pris?_

  Three and nine pence.                 _Tri a naw._

  They are too dear.                    _Maent yn rhy ddrud._

  Here is a very cheap pair.            _Dyma bâr rhad iawn._

  What do you ask for this hat?         _Beth ydych yn ofyn am yr het_
                                          _yma?_

  Twelve shillings.                     _Deuddeg swllt._

  Can you change a ten pound            _A ellwch chwi newid papur_
    note?                                 _deg punt._

  Yes, sir, I can.                      _Gallaf, syr._

  Have you been to market?              _A fuoch chwi yn y farchnad?_

  Yes, and am very much tired.          _Do, ac yr ydwyf wedi blino yn_
                                          _fawr._

  Did you see my mother?                _A welsoch chwi fy mam?_

  Yes, she was waiting for your         _Do, yr oedd yn aros am eich_
    father.                               _tad._

  How is the market to-day?             _Sut y mae y farchnad heddyw?_

  Every thing very dear.                _Pol peth yn bur ddrud._

  Every kind of corn is much            _Pob math o yd yn llawer_
    dearer.                               _drutach._

  Flesh meat is getting dearer.         _Mae cig yn myned yn ddrutach._

  There is no scarcity of anything,     _Nid oes prinder o ddim, oddi_
    except money.                         _eithr arian._




THE END.


LONDON:
Printed by SPOTTISWOODE & CO.
New-street Square.

----




39, PATERNOSTER ROW, LONDON: _September 1857_.

General Alphabetical Lists

OF

SCHOOL-BOOKS

PUBLISHED BY

Messrs. LONGMAN, BROWN, and CO.


ALGEBRA.

  Colenso's Elements, Part I. 12mo. (Key, 5s.)                      4s. 6d.

      "         "     Part II. 12mo. (Key, 5s.)                     6s.

      "         "     complete, for Teachers and Students, 8vo.    12s. 6d.

      "     Algebra for National and Elementary Schools, 18mo.
            (Key, 2s. 6d.)                                          1s. 6d.

      "     Examples and Equation Papers, 12mo.                     2s. 6d.

  Lund's Short and Easy Course of Algebra, fcp. 8vo. (Key, 5s.)     2s. 6d.

  Reynolds's Elementary Algebra for Beginners, 18mo. (Key, 3d.)     1s.

  Scott's Arithmetic and Algebra for the use of Sandhurst College,
   8vo.                                                            16s.

  Tate's Algebra made Easy, intended chiefly for the use of
   Schools, 12mo.                                                   2s.

  Thomson's Elementary Treatise, 12mo. (Key, 4s. 6d.)               5s.

  Wood's Elements, for University Students, by Lund, 8vo.          12s. 6d.

  Lund's Companion to Ditto, 8vo.                                   6s. 6d.

  Young's Elementary Treatise, 12mo. (Key, by Spiller, 6s.)         6s.


ARITHMETIC.

  Blain's Rationale of Arithmetical Teaching, 12mo.                 1s. 6d.

  Colenso's Arithmetic for Schools, 12mo. (Key, by Maynard, 6s.)    4s. 6d.

      "     Text-Book of Elementary Arithmetic, 18mo. (with
   Answers, 2s. 3d.)                                                1s. 9d.

  ==> Colenso's _Elementary_ Arithmetic may be had in Five Parts,
   as follows:—

    1. Text-Book                                                 6d.
    2. Examples, Pt. I. _Simple Arithmetic_                      4d.
    3. Examples, Pt. II. _Compound Arithmetic_                   4d.
    4. Examples, Pt. III. _Fractions, Decimals, Duodecimals_     4d.
    5. Answers to the Examples, with Solutions of the more
       difficult Questions                                       1s.

  Crosby's Walkingame's Tutor's Assistant, by Maynard, 12mo.
   (Key, 3s. 6d.)                                                   2s.

  Galbraith and Haughton's Manual of Arithmetic, 12mo. 2s.; cloth   2s. 6d.

  Hiley's Arithmetical Companion, 18mo. (Key, 1s. 6d.)              2s.

  Hughes's Manual of Arithmetic, fcp. 8vo. (with Key, 3s. 6d.)      1s. 6d.

  Joyce's System of Practical Arithmetic, by Maynard, 12mo.
   (Key, 3s.)                                                       3s.

  Lardner's Treatise on Arithmetic, fcp. 8vo.                       3s. 6d.

  McLeod's Course of Arithmetical Questions, 2 parts, 12mo. each    1s.

    "      Manual for Elementary Instruction, 18mo.                 1s.

    "      Extended Multiplication and Pence Tables, per dozen      2s.

  Molineux's Arithmetic, 2 parts, 12mo. each (Keys, Sixpence each)  2s. 6d.

  Scott's Arithmetic and Algebra for the use of Sandhurst
          College, 8vo.                                            16s.

    "     Decimal Arithmetic for the use of Schools, 12mo.          4s.

  Tate's Treatise on the First Principles of Arithmetic, 12mo.      1s. 6d.

    "    Mental Arithmetic for Teachers, 8vo.                       1s.

  Tate On the New Coinage in relation to our School Arithmetics,
   12mo.                                                                9d.


ASTRONOMY, METEOROLOGY, and NAVIGATION.

  Arago's Popular Astronomy, translated by Smyth and Grant,
          Vol. 1. 8vo.                                             21s.

    "     Meteorological Essays, trans. under Col. Sabine's
          superintendence, 8vo.                                    18s.

  Boyd's Manual for Naval Cadets, with 236 Woodcuts, fcp. 8vo.     10s. 6d.

  Galbraith and Haughton's Manual of Astronomy, 12mo.               2s.

  Herschel's Treatise on Astronomy, fcp. 8vo.                       3s. 6d.

      "      Outlines of Astronomy, 8vo.                           18s.

  Jeans's Problems in Astronomy, Surveying, and Navigation, 12mo.   6s.

    "     Handbook for the Stars of the First and Second
   Magnitude, 8vo.                                                  3s. 6d.

  Stepping-Stone to Astronomy, in Question and Answer, 18mo.        1s.

  Tate's Astronomy and the Use of the Globes, for Beginners, 18mo.  1s.


ATLASES.

  Brewer's Elementary Atlas of History and Geography, royal 8vo.   12s. 6d.

  Butler's Atlas of Ancient Geography, royal 8vo.                  12s.

     "     Junior Ancient Atlas, royal 8vo.                         4s. 6d.

     "     General Atlas of Modern and Ancient Geography,
           royal 4to.                                              24s.

     "     Atlas of Modern Geography, royal 8vo.                   12s.

     "     Junior Modern Atlas, royal 8vo.                          4s. 6d.

     "     Outline Geographical Copy-Books, Ancient and Modern,
           each                                                     4s.

  Hall's First or Elementary Atlas of 10 coloured Maps, oblong 4to. 1s. 6d.

    "    Map-Projections, 1s.; Hall's Outline Maps                  1s.

  Hughes's General Atlas for Elementary Schools, 18mo.
           (coloured, 1s. 6d.)                                      1s.

     "     Introductory Atlas of Modern Geography, 12mo.            2s. 6d.

     "     Atlas of Physical, Political, and Commercial Geography,
           royal 8vo.                                              10s. 6d.

     "     School Atlas of Physical Geography, 12mo.                1s. 6d.

  McLeod's Scripture Atlas, Part I. 4s.; Part II. 3s.; or complete,
           royal 8vo.                                               7s.

     "     Hand-Atlas of _General_ Geography, 29 full-coloured
           Maps, 18mo.                                              2s. 6d.

     "     Class-Atlas of _Physical_ Geography, 20 coloured Maps,
           &c. 18mo.                                                2s. 6d.

     "     Physical Atlas of Great Britain and Ireland


BIOGRAPHY.

  Arago's Lives of Distinguished Scientific Men, 8vo.              18s.

  Maunder's Biographical Treasury, fcp. 8vo.                       10s.

  Merivale's Life and Letters of Cicero, 12mo.                      9s. 6d.

  Stepping-Stone to Biography, in Question and Answer, 18mo.        1s.

  Wheeler's Life and Travels of Herodotus, 2 vols. post 8vo.       21s.


BOOK-KEEPING.

  Isbister's Elements, by Single and Double Entry, 18mo.            1s.

      "      Set of Eight Account-Books adapted to the above, each      6d.


CALCULUS and LOGARITHMS.

  Carmichael's Treatise on the Calculus of Operations, 8vo.         9s.

  Farley's Tables of Six-figure Logarithms from 1 to 10,000,
   post 8vo.                                                        4s. 6d.

  Tate's Principles of the Differential and Integral Calculus,
   12mo.                                                            4s. 6d.


CHEMISTRY.

  Marcet's Conversations on Chemistry, 2 vols. fcp. 8vo.           14s.

  Tate's Outlines of Experimental Chemistry, 12mo. 1s. 6d.; 18mo.   1s.

  Thomson's School Chemistry, fcp. 8vo.                             7s.


CHRONOLOGY.

  Blair's Chronological and Historical Tables, edited by
   Sir H. Ellis                                                    31s. 6d.

  Brewer's Poetical Chronology of Inventions, Discoveries,
           Battles, &c., 12mo.                                      3s. 6d.

     "     Elementary Atlas of History and Geography, royal 8vo.   12s. 6d.

  Hort's Introduction to Chronology and Ancient History, 18mo.      4s.

  Howlett's Tables of Chronology and Regal Genealogies, 4to.        5s. 6d.

     "      Metrical Chronology, post 8vo.                          7s.

  Jaquemet's Compendium, edited by the Rev. J. Alcorn, M.A.,
   post 8vo.                                                        7s. 6d.

  Nicolas's Chronology of History, fcp. 8vo.                        3s. 6d.

  School Chronology, or the Great Dates of History, square 12mo.    1s.

  Slater's School Chronology, or Sententiæ Chronologicæ, 12mo.      3s. 6d.

     "     Coloured Chronological Chart to accompany the above
           (on roller, 9s. 6d.)                                     6s.

  Valpy's Poetical Chronology of Ancient and English History, 12mo. 2s. 6d.


CIVIL LAW and POLITICAL ECONOMY.

  Humphreys's Manual of Civil Law, for Schools and Candidates,
                        fcp. 8vo.                                   3s. 6d.

      "         "       Political Science, for Schools &
                        Candidates, fcp. 8vo.                       3s. 6d.

  Marcet's Conversations on Political Economy, fcp. 8vo.            7s. 6d.


CLASSICAL DICTIONARIES and MYTHOLOGY.

  Barker's Lemprière's Classical Dictionary, edited by Dr. Cauvin,
   8vo.                                                             12s.

  Hort's New Pantheon, or Introduction to Mythology, 18mo.          4s. 6d.

  Lemprière's Classical Dictionary, 8vo.                            9s.

  Rich's Illustrated Companion to the Latin Dictionary and Greek
   Lexicon, with upwards of 2,000 Wood Engravings, post 8vo.       21s.


CONCHOLOGY.

  Catlow's Popular Conchology, or the Shell Cabinet arranged,
   post 8vo.                                                       14s.


COPY-BOOKS.

  McLeod's Graduated Series of Nine Copy-Books, each                    3d.


DRAWING-BOOKS, &c.

  Malan's Aphorisms on Drawing, post 8vo.                           3s. 6d.

  Tate's Drawing for Schools, with numerous Illustrations and
         Exercises, 4to.                                            5s. 6d.

    "    Drawing-Book for Little Boys and Girls, with 130
         Exercises, 4to.                                            1s. 6d.


ENGLISH COMPOSITION, ELOCUTION, and SYNONYMES.

  Brewer's Guide to English Composition, fcp. 8vo.                  5s. 6d.

  Graham's English, or the Art of _Composition_, fcp. 8vo.          6s.

     "     Work on the Attainment of English _Style_

     "     English Synonymes, classified and explained, fcp. 8vo.   7s.

  Hiley's English Composition, PART I. or _Junior Series_, 18mo.
          (Key, 2s. 6d.)                                            1s. 6d.

    "     Practical English Composition, PART II. 18mo.             3s.

  Morell's Handbook of Logic, for Schools and Teachers, fcp. 8vo.   2s.

  Parker's Progressive Exercises in English Composition, 12mo.      1s. 6d.

  Roget's Thesaurus of English Words and Phrases classified,
   crown 8vo.                                                      10s. 6d.


EDUCATION in GENERAL.

  Domestic Economy, Housekeeping, Cookery, &c. (in _Gleig's
   Series_), 18mo.                                                  1s.

  Pillans's Contributions to the Cause of Education, 8vo.          12s.

  Stow's Training System, &c., for Trainers and Governesses,
   post 8vo.                                                        6s.

  Sydenham's Notes of Lessons, 12mo.                                3s.

  Tate's Philosophy of Education, or Principles &c. of Teaching,
   fcp. 8vo.                                                        6s. 6d.


ENGLISH DICTIONARIES.

  Maunder's Treasury of Knowledge and Library of Reference,
   fcp. 8vo.                                                       10s.

  Smart's Walker's Pronouncing Dictionary Remodelled, 8vo.         12s.

    "        "          "          "      Epitomised, 16mo.         6s.

  Sullivan's Dictionary of Derivations, 12mo.                       2s.

      "          "      "  the English Language, 12mo.              3s. 6d.


ENGLISH ETYMOLOGY.

  Black's Student's Manual (_Greek_), 18mo. 2s. 6d.; Sequel
   (_Latin_), 18mo.                                                 5s. 6d.

  Ross's Etymological Manual of the English Language, 18mo.             6d.


ENGLISH GRAMMARS and EXERCISE-BOOKS.

  Downe's (Viscount) Elementary English Grammar, 18mo.              1s.

  Hiley's English Grammar and Style, 12mo.                          3s. 6d.

    "     Abridgment of English Grammar, 18mo.                      1s. 9d.

    "     Child's First English Grammar, 18mo.                      1s.

    "     Exercises adapted to the English Grammar, 12mo.
          (Key, 3s.)                                                2s. 6d.

  Hunter's Text-Book of English Grammar, 12mo.                      2s. 6d.

  McLeod's Explanatory English Grammar, for Beginners, 18mo.        1s.

  Marcet's Game of English Grammar, with Conversations, post 8vo.   8s.

     "     Mary's Grammar, interspersed with Stories, 18mo.         3s. 6d.

     "     Willy's Grammar, interspersed with Stories, 18mo.        2s. 6d.

  Morell's Analysis of Sentences explained and illustrated, 12mo.   2s.

    "      Essentials of English Grammar _and Analysis_, fcp. 8vo.      8d.

    "      Essentials of _English Grammar_, 18mo. Part I. 2d.;
           Part II.                                                     3d.

  Smart's Course of English Grammar, Rhetoric, Logic, &c. 5 vols.
   12mo.                                                           23s. 6d.

  Stepping-Stone to English Grammar, in Question and Answer, 18mo.  1s.

  Sullivan's Attempt to Simplify English Grammar, 18mo.             1s.


ENGLISH PARSING.

  Hunter's Exercises in English Parsing, 12mo.                          6d.

  Lowres's System of English Parsing and Derivation, 18mo.          1s.


ENGLISH POETRY.

  Connon's Selections from Milton's _Paradise Lost_, 12mo.          3s. 6d.

  Cook's First Poetry-Book for Elementary Schools, 18mo.                9d.

    "    Selection of School Poetry, with short Notes, 12mo.        2s.

  Graham's Studies from the English Poets, or Poetical
   Reading-Book, 12mo.                                              7s.

  Hughes's Select Specimens of English Poetry, 12mo.                3s. 6d.

  McLeod's Second Poetical Reading-Book, 12mo.                      1s. 8d.

  Palliser's Modern Poetical Speaker, chiefly for Ladies' Schools,
   12mo.                                                            6s.


ENGLISH READING-BOOKS.

  Hughes's Graduated Reading-Lesson-Books, fcp. 8vo. 3 SERIES, each 3s. 6d.

     "     Select Specimens of English Prose, 12mo.                 4s. 6d.

  Jones's Liturgical Class-Book, from the best authorities, 12mo.   1s. 6d.

  McLeod's First Book to teach Reading and Writing, 18mo.               6d.

     "       "   Reading-Book, 18mo. 3d.; or as Reading-Lessons,
                 in 30 Sheets                                       3s.

  Mann's Lessons in General Knowledge, fcp. 8vo.                    3s. 6d.

  Maunder's Universal Class-Book for Every Day in the Year, 12mo.   5s.

  Pycroft's Course of English Reading, fcp. 8vo.                    5s.

  Sewell's School Speaker and Holiday Task-Book, 12mo.              6s.

  Simple Truths from Scripture, in Easy Lessons, 18mo.                  6d.

  Smart's Historico-Shakspearian Readings, 12mo.                    6s.

  Sullivan's Literary Class-Book, or Readings in Literature, 12mo.  2s. 6d.


ENGLISH SPELLING-BOOKS.

  Carpenter's Scholar's Spelling Assistant, 12mo.                   1s. 6d.

      "          "         "        "       edited by McLeod, 12mo. 1s. 6d.

  Hornsey's Pronouncing Expositor, or New Spelling-Book, 12mo.      2s.

  Mavor's English Spelling-Book, Genuine Edition, 12mo.             1s. 6d.

  Sullivan's English Spelling-Book Superseded, 18mo                 1s. 4d.


EUCLID.

  Colenso's Elements of Euclid, from Simson's Text, 18mo.
            (with _Key_, 6s. 6d.)                                   4s. 6d.

     "      Geometrical Problems (without _Key_, 1s.), with Key,
            18mo.                                                   3s. 6d.

  Galbraith and Haughton's Manual of Euclid, Books I. and II. 12mo. 1s.

  Tate's First Three Books of Euclid's Elements, 12mo. 1s. 6d.;
   18mo.                                                            1s.


FORTIFICATION and the MILITARY ART.

  Hodge's Catechism of Fortification, for Students and Candidates,
   12mo.                                                            2s. 6d.

  Macdougall's Theory of War, post 8vo. with Plans of Battles      10s. 6d.


FRENCH GRAMMARS and EXERCISE-BOOKS.

  Albitès' How to Speak French; or, French & France: Facts,
   Reasons, Practice, 12mo.                                         4s. 6d.
  Cambier's Sandhurst College French Grammar, 12mo.                 5s.

  Charente's Woolwich Academy French Course, 12mo.                 10s. 6d.

  ==> Mr. Charente's _French Course_ may be had as follows:—

    PART I.—Pronunciation—Accidence                              3s.
    PART II.—French and English Syntax compared                  3s.
    PARTS I. and II. forming the _Junior Course_, in 1 vol.
          price                                                  5s. 6d.
    PART III.—Gallicisms and Anglicisms                          3s. 6d.
    PART IV.—Syntaxe de Construction—Syntaxe d'Accord—
         Difficultés                                             3s.
    PARTS III. and IV. forming the _Senior Course_, in 1 vol.
          price                                                  6s.

  Charente's Woolwich Academy French Exercise Book

  Collin's Short French Grammar for Classical Schools, 12mo.        3s. 6d.

  Contanseau's Compendious Grammar of the French Language, 12mo.    4s.

       "       Guide to French Translation, 12mo.                   3s. 6d.

  Hamel's New Universal French Grammar, 12mo.                       4s.

    "     Grammatical Exercises on the French Language, 12mo.
          (Key, 3s.)                                                4s.

    "     French Grammar and Exercises, by Lambert, 12mo.
          (Key, 4s.)                                                5s. 6d.

  Sadler's French Pronunciation & Conversation, in Question &
   Answer, 18mo.                                                    1s.

  Tarver's Eton French Grammar, 12mo.                               3s.

     "       "    "    Exercises, Familiar & Conversational, 12mo.
                       (Key, 3s.)                                   3s. 6d.

     "     French Phraseology explained and compared, 12mo.         3s.


FRENCH DICTIONARIES.

  Contanseau's New Practical French and English Dictionary, post
   8vo.                                                            10s. 6d.

  Nugent's Pocket Dictionary of French & Engl. Languages, 18mo.
   4s. 6d.; 12mo.                                                   7s. 6d.

  Tardy's French Pronouncing Dictionary, 12mo.                      7s.


FRENCH, ITALIAN, and GERMAN READING-BOOKS.

  Cambier's Sandhurst College French Reading-Book or Recueil, 12mo. 5s.

  Charente's Woolwich Academy French Reading-Book

  Contanseau's Prosateurs et Poètes Français, or Selections from
   French Writers                                                   7s. 6d.

  Extraits Choisis from Modern French Writers, by the Author of
   _Amy Herbert_

  Lacaita's Italian Reading-Book, or Selections from best Italian
   Writers, 12mo.                                                   5s.

  Metcalfe's History of German Literature

  Müller's German Reading-Book

  Rowan's Morceaux choisis des Auteurs Modernes, à l'usage de la
   Jeunesse                                                         6s.

  Tarver's Eton French Reading-Book,—Prose, Verse, and
           Phraseology, 12mo.                                       7s. 6d.

     "     Choix en Prose, 12mo. 3s. 6d.; Choix en Vers, 12mo.      3s. 6d.

  Wintzer's First German Reading-Book, for Beginners, fcp. 8vo.     5s.


GREEK CLASSICAL AUTHORS, &c.

  ARISTOTLE'S _Politics_, with English Notes, &c., edited by
   Eaton, 8vo.                                                     10s. 6d.

  EURIPIDES, the 5 Plays, with English Notes by Major, post 8vo.   24s.

  HERODOTUS, with English Notes, &c., edited by Stocker, 2 vols.
   post 8vo.                                                       18s.

  HOMER'S _Iliad_, with English Notes, &c., edited by Valpy, 8vo.  10s. 6d.

  Linwood's _Anthologia Oxoniensis_ (Greek, Latin, and English),
            8vo.                                                   14s.

      "     Treatise on the _Greek Metres_, 8vo.                   10s. 6d.

  SOPHOCLES, with English Notes, &c., edited by Brasse and others,
             2 vols. p. 8vo.                                       34s.

      "      edited, with short Latin Notes, by Linwood, 8vo.      16s.

  Theatre of the Greeks, edited by Donaldson, 8vo.                 15s.

  Walford's Handbook of the Greek Drama, fcp. 8vo.                  6s.

  XENOPHON'S _Anabasis_, with English Notes, &c., edited by
             White, 12mo.                                           7s. 6d.

      "      _Memorabilia_, with English Notes, &c., edited by
             Hickie, p. 8vo.                                        8s. 6d.


GREEK GRAMMARS, EXERCISE-BOOKS, &c.

  Collis's Praxis Græca, I. _Etymology_, 2s. 6d.; II. _Syntax_, 6s.;
                  III. _Accentuation_                               3s.
     "       "    Iambica: Exercises in Greek Tragic Senarii        4s. 6d.

  Howard's Introductory Greek Exercises, 12mo. (Key, 2s. 6d.)       5s. 6d.

  Kennedy's Greek Grammar (Græcæ Grammaticæ Institutio Prima), 12mo.4s. 6d.

     "      Palæstra Stili Græci, or Greek Prose Materials, 12mo.

     "         "     Musarum, or Greek Verse Materials, 12mo.       5s. 6d.

  Moody's New Eton Greek Grammar, in English, 12mo.                 4s.

  Pycroft's Greek Grammar Practice, 12mo.                           3s. 6d.

  Valpy's Elements of Greek Grammar, with Notes, 8vo.               6s. 6d.

    "     Greek Primitives and Leading Words, 12mo.                 6s.

  Valpy's Greek Delectus, improved by White, 12mo. (Key, 2s. 6d.)   4s.

    "     Second Greek Delectus, or New Analecta Minora, 8vo.       9s. 6d.

  Walford's Card of the Greek Accidence, 8vo. 1s.; of the Greek
            Prosody, 8vo.                                           1s.

     "       "     "      "   Accents, _5th Edition_                    6d.

  Yonge's Exercises in Greek Prose Composition, 12mo. (Key, 1s.)    5s. 6d.


GREEK LEXICONS, &c. (_see_ "Latin and Greek").


GEOGRAPHY, GAZETTEERS, &c.

  Adams's Geographical Word-Expositor, _Second Edition_, 12mo.      2s. 6d.

  Arrowsmith's Geographical Dictionary of the Holy Scriptures,
   8vo.                                                            15s.

  Bowman's Questions on Hall's First or Elementary Atlas            2s.

  Butler's Ancient Geography, post 8vo. 4s.; Butler's Modern
           Geography, post 8vo.                                     4s.

     "     Modern and Ancient Geography complete, post 8vo.         7s. 6d.

  Cabinet Gazetteer, by the Author of the _Cabinet Lawyer_, fcp.
   8vo.                                                            10s. 6d.

  Challener's Catechism of English Descriptive Geography, 18mo.     1s. 9d.

  Cunningham's Abridgment of _Butler's Geography_, fcp. 8vo.        2s.

  Dowling's Introduction to _Goldsmith's Geography_, 18mo.              9d.

     "      Questions on _Goldsmith's Geography_, 18mo. (Key, 9d.).     9d.

  Falmouth's Conversations on Geography, or Child's First
   Introduction, fcp.                                               7s. 6d.

  Goldsmith's Grammar of General Geography, fcp. 8vo. (Key, 18mo.
   1s.)                                                             3s. 6d.

  Hartley's Geography for Youth, 12mo. (Outlines, 18mo. 9d.)        4s. 6d.

  Hiley's First Geography for the Elementary Classes, 18mo.             9d.

    "     Progressive Geography, in Lessons and Exercises, 12mo.    2s.

  Hughes's (E.) Geography for Elementary Schools, 18mo.             1s.

       "        Outlines of Physical Geography, 12mo.               3s. 6d.

       "        Examination-Questions on _Physical Geography_, fcp. 8vo.6d.

       "        Outlines of Scripture Geography and History         4s. 6d.

  Hughes's (W.) Manual of Geography, Physical, Industrial, and
                Political                                           7s. 6d.

       "           "      British Geography, fcp. 8vo.              2s.

       "           "      Mathematical Geography, fcp. 8vo.         4s. 6d.

       "        General Geography, in _Gleig's School Series_,
                18mo.                                               1s.

       "        British Geography, in _Gleig's School Series_,
                18mo.                                               1s.

       "        Child's First Geography, in _Gleig's School
                Series_, 18mo.                                          9d.

  Johnston's New General Gazetteer of the World, 8vo.              36s.

  Keith On the Globes, by Taylor, Le Mesurier, and Middleton,
   12mo. (Key, 2s. 6d.)                                             6s. 6d.

  McLeod's Geography of Palestine or the Holy Land, 12mo.           1s. 6d.

    "      Travels of St. Paul, 12mo.

    "      Geography of Old Testament Countries (_excepting
           Palestine_), 12mo.

  Mangnall's Compendium of Geography, for Schools, 12mo.            7s. 6d.

  Maunder's Treasury of Geography, completed by W. Hughes, fcp.
   8vo.                                                            10s.

  Stepping-Stone to Geography, in Question and Answer, 18mo.        1s.

  Sterne's School Geography, Physical and Political, 12mo.          3s. 6d.

  Sullivan's Geography Generalised, 12mo.                           2s.

      "      Introduction to Geography and History, 18mo.           1s.

  Wheeler's Geography of Herodotus developed, explained, and
   illustrated, 8vo.                                               18s.


GEOMETRY.

  Lund's Geometry as an Art, with Easy Exercises, fcp. 8vo.         2s.

    "        "       a Science, with Easy Exercises, fcp. 8vo.      1s. 6d.

  Narrien's Elements of Geometry, for Sandhurst College, 8vo.      10s. 6d.

  Tate's Principles of Geometry, Mensuration, Trigonometry, &c.,
   12mo.                                                            3s. 6d.


GRADUSES.

  Brasse's Greek Gradus, or Prosodial Lexicon, 8vo.                15s.

  Maltby's New and Complete Greek Gradus, 8vo.                     21s.

  Yonge's New Latin Gradus ad Parnassum, post 8vo. (with
          _Epithets_, 12s.)                                         9s.

     "    Dictionary of Latin Epithets, post 8vo.                   3s. 6d.


HISTORICAL and MISCELLANEOUS SCHOOL-BOOKS.

  Anthony's Footsteps to Modern History, fcp. 8vo.                  5s. 6d.

  Balfour's Sketches of English Literature                          7s.

  Brewer's Elementary Atlas of History and Geography, royal 8vo.   12s. 6d.

  Browne's Ancient Greece, 18mo. 1s.; Browne's Ancient Rome, 18mo.  1s.

  Burton's History of Scotland, from 1689 to 1748, 2 vols. 8vo.    26s.

  Child's First History of Rome, fcp. 8vo.                          2s. 6d.

  Corner's Historical Questions, or Sequel to _Mangnall's_, 12mo.   5s.

  Farr's School and Family History of England, 12mo.                5s. 6d.

  First History of Greece, by Author of the _Child's First History
   of Rome_, fcp. 8vo.                                              3s. 6d.

  Gleig's England, or First Book of History, 18mo. (cloth, 2s. 6d.) 2s.

     "    British Colonies, or Second Book of History, 18mo.        1s.

     "       "    India, or Third Book of History, 18mo.            1s.

     "    Sacred History, or Fourth Book of History, 18mo. (cloth,
          2s. 6d.)                                                  2s.

  Historical Questions, Part I. On the above Four Histories, 18mo.  1s.

  Gleig's France, 18mo.                                             1s.

  Gurney's Historical Sketches, _Second Series_, St. Louis and
   Henri IV., fcp. 8vo.                                             6s.

  Keightley's Outlines of History, fcp. 8vo.                        3s. 6d.

  Mackintosh's England, 2 vols. 8vo.                               21s.

  Mangnall's Historical and Miscellaneous Questions, 12mo.          4s. 6d.

  Mann's Lessons in General Knowledge, or Elementary Reading-Book,
   fcp. 8vo.                                                        3s. 6d.

  Marcet's Conversations on the History of England, 18mo.           5s.

  Maunder's Historical Treasury, fcp. 8vo.                         10s.

  Menzies' Analysis of the Constitution and History of England,
   18mo.                                                            1s.

  Merivale's Romans under the Empire, Vols. I. to III. 8vo. 42s.;
             Vols. IV. & V.                                        32s.

      "      Fall of the Roman Empire, 12mo.                        7s. 6d.

  Mure's Language & Literature of Ancient Greece, 3 vols. 8vo.
   36s.; Vol. IV. 15s.; Vol. V.                                    18s.

  Schmitz's Greece, mainly based on _Thirlwall's_, 12mo. with
   137 Woodcuts                                                     7s. 6d.

  Scott's Scotland, 2 vols. fcp. 8vo.                               7s.

  Stafford's Compendium of Universal History, 12mo.                 3s. 6d.

  Stephen's Lectures on the History of France, 2 vols. 8vo.        24s.

  Stepping-Stone to English History, in Question and Answer, 18mo.  1s.

     "       "      French History, in Question and Answer, 18mo.   1s.

     "       "      Grecian History, in Question and Answer, 18mo.  1s.

     "       "      Roman History, in Question and Answer, 18mo.    1s.

  Sterne's Questions on Generalities, 1st & 2d Series, 12mo. each
   (Keys, ea. 4s.)                                                  2s.

  Thirlwall's History of Greece, 8 vols. 8vo. £3; or in 8 vols.
   fcp. 8vo.                                                       28s.

  Turner's Anglo-Saxons, 3 vols. 8vo.                              36s.

     "     England during the Middle Ages, 4 vols. 8vo.            50s.

  Tytler's Elements of General History, 8vo.                       14s.

  Valpy's Latin Epitome of Sacred History, 18mo.                    2s.


JUVENILE WORKS.

  Journal kept during a Summer Tour Abroad, fcp. 8vo.               5s.

  Marcet's Rich and Poor, 18mo.                                     1s.

     "     Seasons, or Stories for very Young Children, 4 vols.
           18mo. each                                               2s.

     "     Willy's Holidays, or Conversations on Government, 18mo.  2s.

     "       "     Stories for Young Children, 18mo.                2s.

     "       "     Travels on the Railroad, 18mo.                   2s. 6d.


LAND-SURVEYING and MENSURATION.

  Boucher's Mensuration, Plane and Solid, with 71 Figures, 12mo.    3s.

  Lund's Elements of Geometry and Mensuration, fcp. 8vo.

  Nesbit's Treatise on Practical Land-Surveying, with 250 Examples,
           8vo.                                                    12s.

     "         "          "      Mensuration, 12mo. (Key, 5s.)      6s.

  Scott's Mensuration and Trigonometry, for Sandhurst College, 8vo. 9s. 6d.

  Tate's Principles of Mensuration, Land-Surveying, Levelling, &c.,
   12mo.                                                            3s. 6d.


LATIN GRAMMARS, EXERCISE-BOOKS, &c.

  Barrett's Little Arthur's Latin Primer, 12mo.                     1s.

     "      Latin Exercises for the Lowest Form, 12mo.              3s. 6d.

  Bradley's New Latin Prose Exercises, 12mo. (Key, 5s.)             3s. 6d.

  Collis's Praxis Latina, Pt. I. for _Beginners_, 2s. 6d.; Pt. II.
   for _Advanced Pupils_                                            3s.

  Hiley's Elements of Latin Grammar, 12mo.                          3s.

     "    Progressive Exercises on Latin Accidence, 12mo.           2s.

  Howard's Introductory Latin Exercises, 12mo.                      2s. 6d.

     "     Latin Exercises Extended, 12mo. (Key, 2s. 6d.)           3s. 6d.

  Kennedy's Elementary Grammar of the Latin Language, 12mo.         3s. 6d.

     "      Latin Vocabulary, on Etymological Principles, 12mo.     3s.

     "      Child's Latin Primer, or First Lessons, 12mo.           2s.

     "      Tirocinium, or First Latin Reading-Book, 12mo.          2s.

     "      Palæstra Latina, or Second Latin Reading-Book, 12mo.    5s.

     "         "     Stili Latini, or Latin Prose Materials, 12mo.  6s.

     "      Examples of Latin Style for Oral Use, 12mo.

     "      Palæstra Camenarum, or Latin Verse Materials, 12mo.

  Moody's New Eton Latin Grammar, in English, 12mo. (Accidence, 1s.)
                                                                    2s. 6d.

  Pycroft's Latin Grammar Practice, 12mo.                           2s. 6d.

  Rapier's Second Latin Verse-Book, by Arnold, 12mo. (Key, 2s. 6d.) 3s. 6d.

  Valpy's Elements of Latin Grammar, with short English Notes,
          12mo.                                                     2s. 6d.

    "     Elegantiæ Latinæ, 12mo. (Key, 2s. 6d.)                    4s. 6d.

    "     Latin Delectus, improved by White, 12mo. (Key, 3s. 6d.)   2s. 6d.

    "     Manual of Latin Etymology, fcp. 4to.                      7s.

    "     Sacræ Historiæ Epitome, with English Notes, 18mo.         2s.

  Walford's Latin Elegiacs, 2 Series, 12mo. each 2s. 6d.; Key to
            _First Series_, 24mo.                                   5s.

     "      Shilling Latin Grammar, 12mo.                           1s.

     "      Grammar of Latin Poetry, 12mo.                          1s.

     "      Hints on Latin Writing, royal 8vo.                      1s. 6d.

     "      Exercises in Latin Prose, adapted to the above _Hints_,
            12mo.                                                   2s. 6d.

     "      Card of Latin Accidence, 8vo.                           1s.

     "        "       "   Prosody, 1s.; Walford's Card of Latin
                          Syntax                                    1s.

  White's New Latin Grammar, complete, 12mo.                        2s. 6d.

    "     Latin Accidence, 12mo. 1s.; White's Eton Latin Grammar,
          12mo.                                                     1s. 9d.

    "     Second or Larger Latin Grammar, 12mo.                     1s. 6d.

  Wilkins's Notes for Latin Lyrics, for the use of Schools, 12mo.   4s. 6d.

  Yonge's Exercises for Latin Verses and Lyrics out of "Own Sense,"
                    12mo.                                           4s. 6d.

    "        "      in Latin Prose Composition, 12mo. (Key, 1s.)    5s. 6d.

  Zumpt's Latin Grammar, translated and adapted by Dr. L. Schmitz,
          8vo.                                                     14s.

    "     School Grammar of the Latin Language, by the same, 12mo.  4s.


LATIN and GREEK LEXICONS, DICTIONARIES, &c.

  Bloomfield's Greek-English Lexicon to the New Testament, fcp.
   8vo.                                                            10s. 6d.

  Englishman's Greek Concordance of the New Testament, royal 8vo.  42s.

  Rich's Illustrated Companion to the Latin Dictionary and Greek
   Lexicon, p. 8vo.                                                21s.

  Riddle's Latin-English and English-Latin Dictionary, 8vo. 21s.;
           and sq. 12mo.                                           12s.

     "     Diamond Latin-English Dictionary, royal 32mo.            4s.

     "     Copious and Critical Latin-English Lexicon, 4to.        31s. 6d.

     "     Latin-English Dictionary, 8vo. 15s.; square 12mo.        7s.

     "     English-Latin Dictionary, 8vo. 7s.; square 12mo.         5s. 6d.

     "     and White's New Latin-English Dictionary, royal 8vo.

     "     and Arnold's English-Latin Lexicon, 8vo.                25s.

     "           "      English-Latin Dictionary, by Ebden,
                        square post 8vo.                           10s. 6d.

  Robinson's Greek-English Lexicon to the New Testament, 8vo.      18s.

  Rost and Palm's Edition of Passow's Greek Lexicon, translated
   by Frädersdorff, and edited by Riddle and White

  Yonge's Dictionary of Latin Epithets, post 8vo.                   3s. 6d.

    "     New English-Greek Lexicon, 4to.                          21s.

    "     Latin Gradus, post 8vo. 9s.; or with _Appendix of
          Epithets_                                                12s.


LATIN CLASSICAL AUTHORS.

  CÆSAR'S _Commentaries_, with English Notes, &c. by Anthon, 12mo.  4s. 6d.

     "       "     Anthon's Edition, as above, improved by Hawkins,
                   12mo.                                            4s. 6d.

  CICERO'S _Select Orations_, with English Notes, by Anthon, 12mo.  6s.

     "      _Cato Major_ and _Lælius_, with English Notes, &c. by
            White, 12mo.                                            3s. 6d.

  CORNELIUS NEPOS, English Notes, &c. by Bradley, improved by
   White, 12mo.                                                     3s. 6d.

  EUTROPIUS, with English Notes, &c. by Bradley, improved by White,
   12mo.                                                            2s. 6d.

  HORACE, with English Notes by the Rev. J. E. Yonge, PART I.
          _Odes_ and _Epodes_                                       3s.

     "    English Notes and Strictures, by Girdlestone and Osborne,
          12mo.                                                     7s. 6d.

     "    with short English Notes, by Valpy, 18mo.                 6s.

  LIVY, the First Five Books, with English Notes, &c. by Hickie,
   post 8vo.                                                        8s. 6d.

  OVID'S _Metamorphoses_, Engl. Notes, &c. by Bradley, improved
   by White, 12mo.                                                  4s. 6d.

  OVID and TIBULLUS, the Eton Selection, with English Notes by
   Valpy, 12mo.                                                     4s. 6d.

  PHÆDRUS, with English Notes, &c. by Bradley, improved by White,
   12mo.                                                            2s. 6d.

  SALLUST, with English Notes, Commentary, &c. by Anthon, 12mo.     5s.

  TACITUS, _Germania_ and _Agricola_, with English Notes, &c.
   by White, 12mo.                                                  4s. 6d.

  TERENCE, from Reinhardt's Text, with English Notes, &c. by
   Hickie, 12mo.                                                    9s. 6d.

  VIRGIL, Wagner's Text, with Notes and 6000 References, by
          Pycroft, 12mo.                                            7s. 6d.

     "    with short English Notes by Valpy, 18mo.                  7s. 6d.


MUSIC-BOOKS, &c.

  Conversations on Harmony, with Music interspersed, 8vo.          12s.

  Formby's Young Singer's Book of Songs, 4to.                       3s. 6d.

     "     Collection of Forty Amusing Rounds and Catches           1s.

     "     Sacred Songs, 4to.                                       3s. 6d.

     "     Sixty Amusing Songs for Little Singers, 4to.             2s. 6d.

  Stepping-Stone to Music, in Question and Answer, 18mo.            1s.

  Turle and Taylor's Singing-Book, or the Art of Singing at
   Sight, 16mo.                                                     5s.


MATHEMATICS.

  Cape's Course of Mathematics, for Addiscombe College, 2 vols.
   8vo.                                                            32s.

  Salmon's Treatise on Conic Sections, 8vo.                        12s.

  Tate's Mathematics for Working Men, Part I. _Arithmetic and
   Algebra_, 8vo.                                                   2s.

  Waddingham's Geometrical Treatise on Conic Sections, 8vo.         6s.

  Wrigley's Collection of Mathematical Examples and Problems, 8vo.  8s. 6d.


MENSURATION (_see_ "Land-Surveying").


NATURAL HISTORY.

  Lee's Elements of Natural History, or First Principles of
   Zoology, fcp. 8vo.                                               7s. 6d.

  Marcet's Lessons on Animals, Vegetables, and Minerals, 18mo.      2s.

  Maunder's Treasury of Natural History, fcp. 8vo.                 10s.

  Stepping-Stone to Natural History, in Question and Answer
   (cloth, 2s. 6d.)                                                 2s.

  Van Der Hoeven's Handbook of Zoology, translated by Clark,
   VOL. I. 8vo.                                                    30s.


PUBLIC SPEAKING.

  Rowton's Debater, or New Theory of Public Speaking, fcp. 8vo.     6s.


RELIGIOUS and MORAL WORKS.

  Bloomfield's larger Greek Testament, with copious English Notes,
               2 v. 8vo.                                            8s.

       "       College and School Greek Testament, English Notes,
               fcp. 8vo.                                            7s. 6d.

       "          "          "    Lexicon to the Greek Testament,
               fcp. 8vo.                                           10s. 6d.

  Conybeare & Howson's Life & Epistles of St. Paul, 2 vols.
   square crown 8vo.                                               31s. 6d.

  Cotton's Short Prayers for Boys, 18mo.                            1s. 6d.

  Englishman's Greek Concordance of the New Testament, royal 8vo.  42s.

       "       Hebrew Concordance of the Old Testament, 2 vols.
               royal 8vo.                                          73s. 6d.

  Gleig's Sacred History, 18mo. (_cloth_, 2s. 6d.)                  2s.

  Horne's Introduction to the Study and Knowledge of the
          Scriptures, 4 v. 8vo.                                    73s. 6d.

    "     Compendium of Ditto, 12mo.                                9s.

  Humphreys's Manual of Moral Philosophy, fcp. 8vo.                 2s. 6d.

  Jones's Liturgical Class-Book, 12mo.                              1s. 6d.

  Kalisch's Commentary on _Exodus_, 8vo. 15s.; and (Abridged)      12s.

  Paley's Evidences of Christianity and Horæ Paulinæ, by Potts,
   8vo.                                                            10s. 6d.

  Readings for Every Day in Lent, from Jeremy Taylor, fcp. 8vo.     5s.

     "         a Month preparatory to Confirmation, fcp. 8vo.       4s.

  Riddle's Manual of Scripture History, fcp. 8vo.                   4s.

  Robinson's Greek and English Lexicon to the Greek Testament,
   8vo.                                                            18s.

  Sewell's Catechism of Early English Church History, fcp. 8vo.     2s.

  Stepping-Stone to Bible Knowledge, in Question and Answer, 18mo.  1s.

  Taylor's Gallery or Collective Bible Lessons, 12mo.               3s. 6d.

     "     Word-Pictures from the Bible, 12mo.                      4s. 6d.

  Tomline's Introduction to the Study of the Bible, fcp. 8vo.       5s. 6d.

  Turner's Sacred History of the World, 3 vols. post 8vo.          31s. 6d.

  Valpy's Latin Epitome of Sacred History, 18mo.                    2s.

  Wheeler's Popular Harmony of the Bible, fcp. 8vo.                 5s.


SCIENCE in GENERAL, NATURAL PHILOSOPHY, &c.

  Book of Domestic Economy, in Gleig's _School Series_, 18mo.       1s.

  Brande's Lectures on Organic Chemistry, fcp. 8vo. Woodcuts        7s. 6d.

  Brewster's Treatise on Optics, fcp. 8vo.                          3s. 6d.

  Downing's Elements of Practical Hydraulics, 8vo.                  5s.

  Faraday's Lectures on the Non-metallic Elements, fcp. 8vo.        5s. 6d.

  Galbraith and Haughton's Manual of Hydrostatics, 12mo.            2s.

     "             "         "       Mechanics, 12mo.               2s.

     "             "         "       Optics, 12mo.                  2s.

     "             "       Scientific Manuals, each 2s.; or cloth   2s. 6d.

  Herschel's Preliminary Discourse on the Study of Natural
   Philosophy, fcp. 8vo.                                            3s. 6d.

  Hunt's Researches on Light, 8vo. Woodcuts                        10s. 6d.

  Lardner and Walker's Electricity, Magnetism, & Meteorology,
   2 v. fcp. 8vo.                                                   7s.

  Lardner's Cabinet Cyclopædia, 133 vols.                     £19. 19s.

     "      Treatise on Heat, fcp. 8vo. Vignette, &c.               3s. 6d.

  Main and Brown's Marine Steam-Engine, 8vo.                        2s. 6d.

   "         "     Questions and Examination-Papers on ditto, 8vo.  4s. 6d.

  Mann's Book of Health, in Gleig's _School Series_, 18mo.          1s.

  Marcet's Conversations on Natural Philosophy                     10s. 6d.

    "           "           Land and Water, 8vo.                    5s. 6d.

    "           "           Vegetable Physiology                    9s.

  Maunder's Scientific and Literary Treasury, fcp. 8vo.            10s.

  Moseley's Illustrations of Practical Mechanics, fcp. 8vo.         8s.

  Pereira's Lectures on Polarised Light, edited by Powell, fcp.
   8vo.                                                             7s.

  Peschel's Elements of Physics, translated by E. West, 3 vols.
   fcp. 8vo.                                                       21s.

  Phillips's Guide to Geology, _4th Edition_, fcp. 8vo. Plates      5s.

     "       Treatise on Geology, 2 vols. fcp. 8vo. Vignettes, &c.  7s.

  Powell's History of Natural Philosophy, fcp. 8vo. Vignette        3s. 6d.

  Stepping-Stone to Animal and Vegetable Physiology, 18mo.          1s.

  Tate's Course of Natural and Experimental Philosophy, 2 vols.
         18mo.                                                      7s.

    "    Electricity, simplified for Beginners, 18mo.               1s.

    "    Elements of Mechanism, 12mo.                               3s. 6d.

    "    Hydrostatics, Hydraulics, and Pneumatics, for Beginners,
         18mo.                                                      1s.

    "    Lessons on Mechanics and Natural Philosophy, 12mo.
         (Key, 3s. 6d.)                                             2s.

    "    Light and Heat familiarly explained for Beginners, 18mo.   1s.

    "    Little Philosopher, or Science of Familiar Things,
         Vol. I. 18mo.                                              3s. 6d.

    "    Magnetism, Voltaic Electricity, and Electro-Dynamics,
         18mo.                                                      1s.

    "    Mechanics and Steam-Engine simplified for Beginners,
         18mo.                                                      1s.

    "    Principles of Mechanical Philosophy applied, 8vo.         10s. 6d.


TRIGONOMETRY.

  Colenso's Plane Trigonometry, Part I. with _Logarithms_, 12mo.
                                (Key, 3s. 6d.)                      3s. 6d.

     "        "        "        Part II. with _Problems_, 12mo.
                                (Key, 5s.)                          2s. 6d.

  Galbraith and Haughton's Manual of Trigonometry, 12mo.            2s.

  Jeans's Plane and Spherical Trigonometry, Part I. 12mo. 4s.;
   Part II.                                                         4s.

  Scott's Plane Trigonometry and Mensuration, for Sandhurst
   College, 8vo.                                                    9s. 6d.




London: LONGMAN, BROWN, GREEN, LONGMANS, and ROBERTS.


PRINTED BY SPOTTISWOODE AND CO., NEW-STREET SQUARE, LONDON.




APPROVED

ELEMENTARY SCHOOL-BOOKS

By WALTER McLEOD, F.R.G.S., M.R.C.P.

HEAD MASTER OF THE MODEL SCHOOL AND MASTER OF METHOD IN THE ROYAL MILITARY
ASYLUM, CHELSEA.


NEW AND IMPROVED EDITIONS.


  McLEOD'S GRADUATED SERIES of NINE COPY-BOOKS, mainly on the Method of
   _Mulhaüser_, greatly simplified and improved. Oblong 4to. _price
   Threepence_ each Copy-Book                                     3d. each.

  McLEOD'S Edition of CARPENTER'S _SPELLING ASSISTANT_, in which the
   Division of Words into _Syllables_ corresponds with the _Pronunciation_.
                                                              12mo. 1s. 6d.

    ==> The ORIGINAL EDITION of _Carpenter's Scholar's Spelling Assistant_,
        with the Author's latest Corrections, may also be had, price
        Eighteenpence.

  McLEOD'S EXPLANATORY ENGLISH GRAMMAR for Beginners, with Practical
   _Exercises_ and Graduated and _Parsing-Lessons_                18mo. 1s.

  McLEOD'S MANUAL of ARITHMETIC, containing a _Graduated Series_ of 1750
   _Questions_ for Class Instruction                              18mo. 1s.

  McLEOD'S MENTAL ARITHMETIC, _Whole Numbers_ and _Fractions_, comprising a
   Systematic Course in _Question and Answer_      12mo. 2 Parts, 1s. each.

  McLEOD'S EXTENDED MULTIPLICATION and PENCE TABLES, with the Tables of
   _Weights and Measures_, and Four Exercises in each Page        18mo. 2d.

  McLEOD'S GEOGRAPHY of PALESTINE or the HOLY LAND, including _Phœnicia_
   and _Philistia_, and the Towns and Places in _Asia Minor_ visited by the
   Apostles. With coloured Map                                12mo. 1s. 6d.

  McLEOD'S TRAVELS of ST. PAUL: A Description of the Countries, Towns, and
   Islands mentioned in the Journeys of the Apostle. Being the continuation
   of McLeod's _Geography of Palestine_. 12mo. with Map    [_In the press._

  McLEOD'S GEOGRAPHY of the OLD TESTAMENT COUNTRIES (excepting Palestine).
   Being the Third Part of McLeod's _Scripture Geography_, and completing
   the work. 12mo. with 2 Maps                             [_In the press._

  CLASS EDITION of McLEOD'S SCHOOL-ATLAS of SCRIPTURE GEOGRAPHY, comprising
   15 _full-coloured Maps_, and _Index_, price 4s.; _Illustrative
   Letterpress_ to ditto, price 3s.; the _Scripture Atlas_ complete
                                                             Royal 8vo. 7s.

  McLEOD'S SCHOOL PHYSICAL ATLAS of GREAT BRITAIN and IRELAND: Comprising
   56 full-coloured Maps and numerous coloured Sections and Diagrams; with
   Descriptions of the Plates                              [_In the press._

  McLEOD'S CLASS-ATLAS of PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY, comprising 20 _coloured
   Maps_, and 10 _Sections_ and Diagrams: With Explanatory Descriptions of
   the Plates. Price 2s. 6d. _sewed_; or 3s. _half-bound_.    18mo. 2s. 6d.

  McLEOD'S HAND-ATLAS of GENERAL GEOGRAPHY, comprising 29 full-coloured
   Maps, from Steel Plates engraved in the best manner by E. WELLER,
   F.R.G.S. Price 2s. 6d. _sewed_; or 3s. _half-bound_        18mo. 2s. 6d.

  McLEOD'S FIRST READING-BOOK for _Families and Schools_, in a Series of
   Easy and Instructive Lessons, with Woodcuts                    18mo. 3d.

  McLEOD'S READING-LESSONS for _Infant Schools_ and _Junior Classes_, being
   the above printed in a very bold type on 30 large Broadside Sheets
                                                                  Price 3s.

  McLEOD'S MY FIRST SCHOOL-BOOK to teach me READING and WRITING: With
   _Spelling Exercises_ on each Reading-Lesson                    18mo. 6d.

  McLEOD'S MY SECOND SCHOOL-BOOK to teach me SPELLING and READING,
   conveying much useful _Information on "Common Things"_ in classified
   Reading-Lessons. Woodcuts                                      18mo. 1s.

  McLEOD'S SECOND POETICAL READING-BOOK, with Explanatory Notes, Exercises
   in Spelling and Etymology, and an Argument to each Extract       1s. 8d.


London: LONGMAN, BROWN, GREEN, LONGMANS, and ROBERTS.

       *       *       *       *       *



Corrections made to printed text

Entry "A-bout": "nghglch" changed to "nghylch"

Header "A-lay" changed to "Al-lay"

Entry "De-fend-ant": "amdiffynol" changed to "amddiffynol"

Entry "Eye-serv-ice": "llgad-wasanaeth" changed to "llygad-wasanaeth"

Header "Com-form-i-ty" changed to "Con-form-i-ty"

Header "Com-tem-pla-tion" changed to "Con-tem-pla-tion"

Entry "So-bri-e-ty": "cymmedvoldeb" changed to "cymmedroldeb"

Entry "Cred-i-bil-i-ty": "coeledigaeih" changed to "coeledigaeth"

Sentence "And I am too": "minnnau" changed to "minnau"





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of A Graduated English-Welsh Spelling Book, by 
John Lewis

